## United States Patent (19) Strobel et al.

## (54) PROCESS  FOR  THE  PREPARATION  OFA CATALYST  AND  CATALYST  USED  IN OLEFN  POLYMERZATION

75)

Inventors:  Wolfgang  Strobel, Hofheim; Rainer Franke, Frankfurt  am  Main,  both  of Fed. Rep. of  Germany

Hoechst  Aktiengesellschaft, Frankfurt  am  Main, Fed. Rep. of Germany

(21) Appl. No.: 744,310

22 Filed:

Nov.  23,  1976

## (30) Foreign Application Priority Data

Nov.  27, 1976  (DE Fed. Rep.  of  Germany  .......  2553179

51)

Int. Cl.'............................ C08F  /02;  C08F  4/64 4

52

U.S.  C.  ................................  252/429  C;  252/428;

252/430; 526/129; 526/151; 526/156

58 Field of  Search ...................  252/429  C,  428,  430, 252/441

73) Assignee:

11 4,148,754 45 Apr.  10, 1979

## (56) References  Cited

## U.S. PATENT  DOCUMENTS

| 3,202,645   | 8/1965   | Yancey .................................                |
|-------------|----------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| 3,787,384   | 1/1974   | 252/.441 Stevens ............................ 252/429 C |

Stevens ............................  252/429  C

Primary Examiner-Winston  A. Douglas

Attorney, Agent, or Firm-Curtis, Morris  &amp;  Safford

Assistant Examiner-P. E. Konopka

## 57 ABSTRACT

When  reacting the reaction product of  silicon dioxide and/or  a  metal  oxide  and  a  Grignard  compound  with  a soluble  titanium  compound,  there  is obtained  a  catalyst for  the  polymerization  of  1-olefins, which  gives a  very high yield and allows  a  good  control of  the molecular weight by means of  hydrogen without making neces sary  a  separation of  the  excess  of  metallo-organic  com pounds  and/or  the  excess of  titanium compounds  from the  catalyst carrier.

## 30  Claims, No  Drawings

1.

## PROCESS  FOR  THE  PREPARATION  OFA CATALYST  AND  CATALYST  USED IN OLEFN POLYMERZATION

The  present  invention relates to the  preparation of  a catalyst for the polymerization of  ethylene and  higher 1-olefins.

25

A  process  for  the  preparation of  a  catalyst for  use  in the polymerization of olefins has been described, in  10 which organic alkali metal compounds  are allowed to act on the hydroxyl groups of  finely dispersed metal oxides, for example silicon dioxide, and the reaction product is  reacted subsequently with a metal halide selected from  group  VIIa  of  the  Periodic  system,  espe  15 cially manganese  hexachloride  (cf. U.S.  Pat.  No. 3,205,177). The  solid obtained gives  a  catalyst suitable for use in the olefin polymerization when combined with  a  metallo-organic  compound  the  metal  of  which  is selected from one of  groups I to III of  the periodic  20 system. These  catalysts, however, have  a low  activity and produce only 1.4 kg of  polyethylene per gram of manganese  in 3 hours  at a polymerization temperature of  95  C. and under  an  ethylene pressure of  98  atmo spheres.

A  further process comprises impregnating a solid carrier, for  example  calcium carbonate, with  an  alumi num-organic compound and treating it  subsequently with an excess of  titanium tetrachloride, whereby re duced titanium trichloride forms a sediment on the 30 carrier (cf.  British  Pat.  No. 927,969). Thereafter the excess  of  titanium tetrachloride must  be  removed.  The polymerization activity of  the catalysts thus obtained, however, is likewise so low that the residual catalyst must  be  removed  from  the  polyolefin produced. 35

dium  are used  in  an  amount  such  that  the  separation of  45  from  50  to 1000  m2/g,  preferably  from  100  to  800,  espe sure of  39  atmospheres. A econdary treatment of  the  55  groups  per  gram  of  carrier. Several of  these  oxides are Suitable  carriers  are  porous  oxides  or  mixed  oxides  of silicon and/or aluminum having a specific surface of cially  from  150  to  650  and  a  pore  volume n  the  range  of i from 0.2 to 2 ml/g, preferably of  from 0.4 to 2, espe cially of  from  0.6  to 1.7  ml/g.  The  particle  size  is  in the range of  from 1 to 500 am, preferably from 10 to 200 um, especially of  from 20  to 100 um.  The  number  of hydroxyl  groups  depends  on  the  specific  surface  and  the temperature of  the preliminary treatment and  is in the range  of  from  0.5  to  50  mmols referably  of  from 1  to  20 p mmols, especially of  from 1.5 to 10 mmols, hydroxyl prepared especially for being used  as a carrier of  sup ported catalysts. They  are  commercial  products.

2

periodical  system,  and  the  excess  of  the  transition  metal compound  is removed  by  washing with a solvent. By washing  out  the metallo-organic  compounds  of  magne sium or aluminum and the transition metals there are formed  highly  diluted  solutions,  which  must  be  decom posed  subsequently.  As   consquence  thereof,  undesired a waste  products  are  obtained,  which  are  contained  in  the waste  water  (cf. German Offenlegungsschrift  No. 2,109,273).

It has  now  been  found  that  a  catalyst  suitable  for  use in the polymerization of 1-olefins can be obtained by starting from the reaction product of  silicon dioxide and/or  a metal oxide  with  a  Grignard compound  as a carrier and a soluble titanium compound, which cata lyst gives high yields and  allows  a  good  control of  the molecular  weight  by  means  of  hydrogen  without  mak ing a  separation of  the excess of  metallo-organic com pounds  and/or  of  titanium  compounds  from  the  carrier necessary.

The  present invention consequently provides a pro cess for the preparation of  a catalyst by reacting the reaction product of silicon dioxide and/or aluminum oxide and 1. a halogen-containing magnesium-organic compound  and 2. a halogen compound  of  a  transition metal  (component  A)  with  a  metallo-organic  compound (component B), which  comprises reacting a  silicon di oxide and/or aluminum oxide having  a  hydroxyl con tent of  from  0.5 to  50  mmols/g  first with  a  magnesium compound  of  the formula RMgX,  in which R s a  hy i droxarbon  radical  having  from  1 to  20  carbon  atoms  and X  is chlorine, bromine or iodine, in the presence of  a diluent, in an  amount  of  from  0.05 to 1  mol  of  magne sium compound per mol of hydroxyl groups of the carrier and  reacting thereafter the  solid reaction prod uct in suspension with a halogen-containing titanium (IV)  compound  of  the  formula  TiX(OR))4-,  in  which n  is an  integer  of  rom 1 to  4, X  s chlorine  or  bromine f i and R  is a  hydrocarbon  radical  having  of  from  1 to 12 carbon atoms, in an amount of  from 0.01 to 1  mol of titanium compound  per  mol  of  hydroxyl  groups  of  the carrier, to obtain the component  A.

Finally a process for the preparation of  supported catalysts has been disclosed, in which an excess of  a metallo-organic magnesium  or aluminum  compound  is allowed to act  on  silicon dioxide, aluminum  oxide or  a mixture consisting of silicon  dioxide and aluminum oxide  having  superficial hydroxyl  groups  and  the reac tion product  is reacted,  after  the  excess  of  said  organo  65  whereby  it is reduced  with  an  increasing temperature. metallic  compound  has  been  removed  by  washing,  with an excess of  a  halogen compound  of  a  transition metal selected from one of groups IVa, Va  or VIa of the Prior to the reaction of  the hydroxyl groups of  the carrier  with  the  halogen-containing  magnesium-organic compounds the absorbed water must be removed by drying  at  a  temperature  of  from  120 to  800° C.,  prefera bly of  from  200  to 500  C. The  number  of  hydroxyl groups (mmol  of  hydroxyl groups  per  gram  of  carrier) may  be  modified  by  said  treatment  at  high  temperature, After drying the carrier is kept under an inert gas atmosphere, for example nitrogen or argon, with the exclusion of  air or  water.

Furthermore, there are known catalysts used in the polymerization  of  olefins, which  are  obtained  by  treat ing  an  oxide,  hydroxide,  carbonate  or  sulfate of  magne sium or  calcium with an  aluminum-organic compound and  subsequently reacting  the  compound  obtained  with a mixture  of  halides  of  titanium  and  vanadium  (cf. Ger man  Auslegeschrift No. 2,140,326). In the preparation of  these  catalysts  the  aluminum-organic  compound  and the transition metal compound of  titanium and vana an excess of  these compounds  may  be  dispensed with, but  on  the  other  hand,  active  catalysts  for  the  polyolefin polymerization  cannot  be  obtained  when  using  as  transi tion metal compounds solely titanium compounds. A catalyst, for example, which  had  been prepared  by  re 50 acting magnesium  oxide  with  aluminum  triethyl and  by subsequently treating the product obtained with tita nium  tetrachloride  yielded  per  hour  only  19.5g  of  oly p ethylene  per 1 gram  of  titanium  under  an  ethylene  pres s polyethylene  obtained was necessary for removing  the residual catalyst because of  the discoloration of  poly ethylene.

3

20

Suitable halogen-containing magnesium-organic compounds are compounds of  the formula RMgX,  in which R  is a  hydrocarbon  radical having  from 1 to 20, preferably  from  2  to 10  carbon  atoms  and  X  s chlorine, i bromine or iodine. These compounds are known as Grignard  compounds  and  may  be  prepared,  for  example by reaction of  metallic magnesium with a halogenhy drocarbon  having  from  1 to 20,  preferably  from  2  to 10 carbon  atoms,  for  example  an  alkyl,  -cycloalkyl-or  aryl halide, in the presence of  a nucleophilic solvent, for example  an  ether  (cf. Organikum,  VEB eutscher  Ver D lag der  Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1964, page  466). These compounds  may  also be prepared in a hydrocarbon in the absence of an ether.  Preferred magnesium com pounds  are  ethyl magnesium  chloride, n-propyl magne  15 sium  chloride,  i-propyl magnesium  iodide, n-butyl  mag nesium chloride, t-butyl magnesium chloride, phenyl and  magnesium  bromide.  n-Propyl  magnesium  chloride and  n-butyl  magnesium  chloride  are  particularly  prefer able.

4.

The separated diluent may be reused after having been recovered.

The solid carrier impregnated with the Grignard compound is  thereafter suspended again in an inert dispersing  agent,  preferably  in an  inert  hydrocarbon.  A dispersing  agent  conventionally used  for  the  polymeri zation  under low pressure  according  to  Ziegler  is chosen preferably.

To the suspension obtained there is  added subse quently a halogen-containing titanium(IV) compound, at a temperature of  from 20 to 140  C., preferably of from  30  to 130 C,  especially  of  from  40  to 120° C.  and the  mixture  is  stirred  at  this  temperature  until  a  titanium compound  can no  longer  be  detected in the  suernatant solution, generally within a period of from 2 to 20 hours.

Titanium tetrachloride, TiCl2(O-i-C3H)2 and TiCl 3(O-i-C3H7) are  used  preferably.

O  used  for  the  preparation  of  the  Grignard  compound,  the When not an ether but a saturated hydrocarbon is diluent  need  not  be  separated  and  the  titanium(IV)  com pound may  be directly added  to the reaction mixture. Suitable  inert  dispersing  agents  are  aliphatic  or  cycloali phatic  hydrocarbons,  for  example pentane,  hexane, heptane, cyclohexane, methylcyclohexane as well as aromatic hydrocarbons, for example  benzene, toluene, xylene, and  furthermore  benzine  or  Diesel  oil fractions, which have been carefully purified of  oxygen, sulfur compounds  and  moisture, may  be  used.

25

The Grignard compound reacts in known manner with the hydroxyl groups placed at the surface of  the carrier at a temperature below 100°  C. while splitting off hydrocarbon, with the addition of  -Mgx  to the oxygen  of  the  hydroxyl  group  according  to the  follow ing equation:

<!-- image -->

The reaction of  the solid carrier with the Grignard compound may be carried out in the following way: The  solid carrier is suspended in an inert diluent, the dissolved Grignard compound  is added at a tempera ture of  from -20° to 150° C., preferably of  from  0 to 120° C.,  especially of  from  20' to 100° C., and  allowed to  act  on  the  suspension  for  a  period of  from  0.5  to  20,  45 preferably from 0.5 to  10,  especially from 0.5 to 2, hours.  The  proportion  of  Grignard  compound  and  solid carrier is chosen such that from 0.05 to 1, preferably from  0.1 to  0.95, mol  of  alkyl magnesium  halide  is used per  mole  of  hydroxyl  groups  of  the  carrier. The  magne  50 sium  compound  is applied on  the  carrier quantitatively in said process. The reaction is  completed when no more magnesium can be detected in the supernatant solution after the  solid carrier has  settled.

---o-it-oh  -- RMgX  -o-i-o-Mex  -- R-H -O -O Consequently one mol of  magnesium alkyl chloride is chemically bound  per mole  of  hydroxyl groups  of  the carrier. The  number  of  hydroxyl  groups  of  the carrier  35  branched  alkyl  radical  having  from  1 to  8  carbon  atoms, may, consequently, be determined by volumetric or chromatographic analysis of  the hydrocarbon formed or  by  retitration of  the  excess  of  Grignard  compound. 30 compound  of  the formula  TiXn  (OR)4-,  wherein n  is The  halogen-containing titanium(IV) compound  is a an  integer  of  from 1 to 4  and  X  s chlorine  or  bromine i and R is a hydrocarbon radical, preferably an alkyl, aryl or  aralkyl radical having  from 1 to 12, preferably from 1 to  8  carbon  atoms,  especially  a  straight  chain  or for  example  TiCl4,  TiCl3,  (O-n-C3H7),  TiCl2(O-nC3H7)2,  TiCl(O-n-C3H7)3,  TiCl2(O-1-C3H)2,  TiCl3(O-iC3H7),  TiCl3(O-CH2C6H5),  TiCl2(O-CH2C6H5)2,  TiCl 3(O-i-C4H9) and  TiCl2(O-i-C4H9)2.

The  proportion  between  the  titanium  compound  and the  solid carrier is chosen  such  that of  from  0.01 to 1, preferably  of  from  0.05  to 1, especially  of  from  0.1 to 1, mol of  titanium compound  is used per 1  mole of  hy droxyl groups  of  the  solid carrier.

The  proportion of, Grignard compound  to the tita nium  compound  is chosen  such that the  atomic  ratio of magnesium  to  titanium  in  the  catalyst  component  A  s  in i the range  of  from  0.01 to 10, preferably  of  from  0.05  to 5, especially of  from  0.1 to 2.

Suitable diluents  are  all solvents inert with regard  to  55 Grignard  compounds,  for  example  saturated hydrocar bons or ethers, for example pentane, hexane, heptane, diethyl  ether,  tetrahydrofurane,  or mixture  of both types  of  compounds.

Suitable  compounds  for  the  component  B re  organic a compounds  of  the  metals  selected  from  one  of  the  main groups I, II and III of  the  periodic  system. Aluminum organic compounds  are preferably used as component B.

The  catalyst component  A  thus obtained is used ei ther directly in the form of  the suspension or  after re moval  of  the diluent  and  drying.

After  completion  of  the  above  reaction the  diluent  is separated  by  filtration  and  drying  or  directly  by  distilla tion, at a  temperature  of  from  50  to  200  C., if  it con tains  an  ether.  The  separation  of  the  diluent  is necessary for removing the ether, which has been used for the preparation of  the Grignard compound  and formed a  65  bon  atoms.  The  reaction  products  of  aluminum  trialkyls complex  with  said  compound,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the ether also reacts with the titanium compound while forming  a  complex  and  deactivates the  catalyst. 60 Suitable aluminum-organic compounds  are the reac tion products of  aluminum-trialkyls or aluminum dial kyl  hydrides,  containing  alkyl radicals  having  from  1 to 16 carbon  atoms, with dienes having  from  4  to 20  car or aluminum-dialkyl  hydrides,  the  alkyl  radicals  of which have from 4 to 8 carbon atoms, for example phellandrene of  a  diene of  the formula

5

<!-- image -->

10

wherein R2 and R2  is hydrogen, an alkyl radical, an alkylene  radical  having  a  non-terminal  double  bond  or  a mononuclear  aryl radical  and  a  is 0  or 1, are  used  prefer ably. There may  be mentioned, by way of  example, 1,4-butadiene,  isoprene,  2-phenyl butadiene,  1,4-pen tadiene,  1,3-pentadiene  and  myrcene.  The reaction products  of  Al(i-C4H9)3  or  Al(i-C4H9)2H  with  isoprene are  used  preferably. They  comprise,  for  example,  com pounds  of  the  formula

<!-- image -->

15

Z-A-R-Y-Z

wherein Y  means  the  groups

<!-- image -->

20

1-,

6

from -30  to 150° C., preferably of  from  0  to 100° C., with  a  molar  ratio between  metallo-organic compound and  titanium compound  of  from  0.2:1 to  3:1, preferably from 0.5:1  to 2:1.  If a  chlorine-containing metallo organic compound is used it is advisable to wash the reaction product obtained with fresh dispersing agent. Thereafter  it is  activated  with  a  further  metallo-organic compound  at a  temperature  of  from  20  to 150 C.

The  molecular  weight  of  the  polymer  is controlled  in known  manner, preferably by  using  hydrogen.

25

30

Z  is  hydrogen,  the  isobutyl  group,  the  dihydroisoprenyl group or  an oligomer of  this group, R is the isobutyl radical, R4 s  the  tetrahydroisoprenylene  radical  and  n  is i an  integer  of  from  d1 to  20, the  compounds  of  the  for mula

<!-- image -->

35

wherein  Y, R3  and Rand  n  are  defined as  above.  The ratio between C5  and C4  radicals in the reaction prod ucts  of  A1(i-C4H9)3  or  A1(i-C4H9)2H  with  isoprene  may generally  be  in the  range  of  from  0.25  to 10, preferably 1  to 4. A  compound of  this type being commercially available under  the  name  "aluminum  isoprenyl'  is used particularly preferable.

When  using  the  catalyst  according  to  the  invention  at least  one  1-olefin  of  the  formula  R6-CH=CH2, wherein R6  is hydrogen  or  a  straight  chain  or  branched alkyl radical having  from 1  to 10, preferably  from 1 to 8, carbon atoms, is polymerized. Examples of such olefins  are  ethylene,  propylene,  butene-1,  hexene-1, 4-methyl-pentene-1, octene-1.  Ethylene is  preferably polymerized  alone  or  as  a  mixture  consisting  of  at  least 70%  by  weight  of  ethylene  and  at  most  30%  by  weight of  a  further 1-olefin of  the  above  formula. Ethylene  is especially  polymerized  either  alone  or  as  a  mixture  of t a least 92%  by weight of  ethylene and at most 8%  by weight  of  a  further 1-olefin of  the  above  formula.

The  polymerization  may  be  carried  out  in  solution,  in suspension or in the gaseous phase, continuously or discontinuously,  at  a  temperature  of  from  20  to 150  C., preferably of  from  60 to 140  C., under  a  pressure of from  0.5  to  50 ars. It  is carried  out  preferably  under  the b technically  interesting  pressure  in  the  range  of  rom  1 to f 40  bars.

Thereby  the  titanium compound  is used  in a  concen tration  of  from  0.005  to 1.5,  preferably  of  rom  0.05  to 1, f mmol per liter of  dispersing agent or reactor volume. The  metallo-organic  compound  is used  in a concentra tion of  from  0.5 to 10  mmols,  preferably  of  from  2  to  6 mmols,  per  liter of  dispersing  agent  or  reactor  volume. Higher  concentrations  are also possible principally.

The  polymerization in suspension or  solution is car ried  out  in a  conventional  inert  solvent  for  low  pressure processes according to Ziegler, which have been de scribed above.

Further suitable compounds for component B are chlorine-containing aluminum-organic compounds, for example dialkyl aluminum monochlorides of the for mula  R52AlCl  or  alkyl  aluminum  sesqui-chlorides  of  the formula  R53Al2Cl3,  wherein  R5  is  a  hydrocarbon  radical having from 1  to 16 carbon  atoms, preferably an  alkyl radical having from 1  to 16, especially from 2 to 12 carbon atoms. There may  be mentioned, by way of  50  formed  from  which  the  metal  compounds  must  be  sepa example  (C2H5)2AlCl,  (i-C4H9)2AlCl, (C2H5)3Al2Cl3. Especially suitable compounds  for the component B are aluminum trialkyls of  the formula AllR3  or  alumi num  dialkyl hydrides of  the formula  AllR2H,  wherein R5  is a  hydrocarbon  radical  having  from 1 to 16  carbon atoms,  preferably an  alkyl radical having  from 1 to 16, especially  from 2 to  4 carbon atoms, for example Al(C2H5)3,  Al(C2H5)2H  Al(C3H7)2H,  Al(i-C4H9)3,  Al(iC4H9)2H. The conversion of the titanium(IV) compound of  60  machines  do  not  occur.  Thus  expensive  operations  such component  A  nto  the  polymerization  active  compound i having a lower valency is advantageously performed during the  polymerization  by  the  metallo-organic  com pound  (component B) at a  temperature of  from 20' to 150° C., preferably  of  from  60' to 140  C. 45 55  the  invention  gives  high  catalyst  yields  under  low  pres 65  highly  improved with an increasing polymerization The  process according to the invention has the ad vantage  that  excessive  metal  compounds  do  not  have  to be  removed  from  the  catalyst  component  A y  washing, b owing  to  the  fact  that  both  the  halogen-containing  mag nesium-organic compound used and the halogen-con taining titanium(IV) compound react completely with the  carrier. Consequently,  no  washing  liquids  are rated prior to the secondary treatment. As a conse quence thereof there are formed no metal-containing waste water or  slurries. During the polymerization of ethylene and  higher 1-olefins the  catalyst  according to sure, for example of from 1  to 7 bars, such that the magnesium/titanium  and  aluminum compound may completely  remain  in  the  polymer;  a  discoloration  of  the polyolefin or corrosion phenomena on the processing as  a  decomposition  of  the  catalyst  and  a  removal  of  the catalyst may  be  dispensed  with. Carrying  out  the  poly merization  under  a  higher  pressure  permits  use  of  a  still smaller quantity of catalyst,  as the catalyst yield  is pressure.

The  catalyst according  to the invention is especially suitable for the polymerization of  ethylene in the  gase

Component A  may also be treated with a metallo organic compound  prior to polymerizing and be used subsequently in the  polymerization  at a temperature  of

7

ous phase in a fluidized bed. The  use of  oxide  carriers having  a  particle size of  more  than  30  Jum, which  may be  obtained for example  by  separating  fine  particles  by sieving, prevents finely divided catalysts or polymer parts from being carried out of the fluidized bed and forming  deposits in exterior zones  of  the reactor.

8

particle size  of  70 um  is dried  for 6  hours  in  a  fluidized bed at 460  C. under an argon atmosphere and kept under an argon atmosphere. The number  of  hydroxyl groups  is 1.7 mmols  of  hydroxy  groups  per 1 g  of  silicic acid.

20

The  catalyst  according  to  the  invention  permits  prep aration  of  a  polymer,  the  powder  in  bulk  of  which  has  a high air permeability and thus may  directly be  used in the processing  by  injection molding  or  extrusion with 10  ether  are  added  and  the  mixture  is heated  for  4  hours  to out  previous  granulation.  A ood  air  permeability  of he g t powder  in  bulk  in  the  extruder  feeding  zone  prevents  an incorporation of air into the molten polymer, which would  cause  a  formation  of  bubbles  in  the  finished part. The  porous  silicon dioxide having  one  or more  sur 15 face OH  groups is designated as "silicic acid' in the examples. 107 g  of  this silicic acid are  suspended  in 500  ml  of nheptane under  an  argon  atmosphere,  343  ml  of  a  solu tion of  172  mmols  of  n-propyl magnesium  chloride  (1.6 mnols  of  magnesium  per 1  g  of  silicic acid) in diethyl 50° C. The  solvent is withdrawn  thereafter in a rotary evaporator  and  the  solid product  is dried  for  2  hours  at 120°  C. under  0.5 torr. Thereafter the  solid product  is suspended  in 500  ml  of  n-heptane  under  an  argon  atmo sphere, 20.3 g  of  titanium tetrachloride (1.0 mmol  of titanium per 1 g  of  silicic acid) are  added  and  the mix ture  is stirred  for  7  hours  at  90° C.  Heptane  is  thereafter withdrawn at 120° C. in the rotary evaporator under atmospheric pressure.  128 g of  a flowable powder is obtained.

The  titanium  analysis  reveals  39.8  mg  of  titanium  per 1  g  of  the  component  A.  The  atomic ratio of  magnesi um/titanium  is 1.6:1.

25

For  determining the number  of  hydroxyl groups of the carrier 10.0 g  of  the dried silicic acid are reacted under  an  argon  atmosphere  while  refluxing  and  stirring with a solution of  500 mmols of  n-propyl magnesium chloride in 500 ml of  diethyl ether, for a period of  4 hours. After settling of  the silicic acid magnesium is retitrated in the supernatant solution by  way  of  com plexometry.

The  titanium content of  component  A  s determined i colorimetrically  by  using  hydrogen  peroxide  (cf. G.  O. Muller, Praktikum der quantitativen chemischen Ana lyse, 4th edition, (1957), page  243).

30

For  the polymerization in suspension there is used  a hydrated Diesel oil fraction having  a  boiling range of from 140 to 200 C.

The  melt  index  of  the  polymer  is determined  accord ing to DIN  (German Industrial Standard) 53,735, at 190° C.,  by  using  a  load  of    kg  for  is  and  of  15  kg or  i15. 5 f

35

The  bulk  density is determined  by  weighing 100  cm of  polyethylene  powder.

The reduced specific viscosity (RSV)  is determined with  a  solution  of  decahydronaphthalene  at 135  C.  at  a concentration  of  1 g/b 1.

45

The  air permeability is determined in the following manner: 100  cm3  of  polyethylene  powder  are  placed  in a  graduated  cylinder, which  has  an  inner  diameter  of  3 cm  and  a  fritted  glass  bottom,  and  air  suctioned  through the powder  at a rate of  flow of  4  l/h; the  pressure de crease occuring in the powder in bulk is determined. The  air  permeability  is then  determined  in  the  following nanner:

height of  the  package X  flow  velocity air permeability (L) = diameter of  the  cylinder X  pressure loss.

50

In  the  present  invention  L  s  0.023/A  p  -  1, whereby i A  p  is  millimeters  of  the  water  column  and  1 mm ater w column  corresponds  to  the  pressure  loss  of he  glass  frit. t The  diamension  of  L  is (cm .  . sec/g).

The  following  examples  illustrate the  invention.

All solvents are distilled under an inert gas atmo sphere having  a  purity of  at  least 99.995%  in a  circula tion apparatus  while  passing  over  benzophenone  potas sium  and  are  withdrawn  under  an  inert  gas  atmosphere. The  preparation of  the  catalyst and  the  polymerization of  ethylene  are  carried out under  an  argon  atmosphere or  under  an  atmosphere  of urified nitrogen  while  care p fully excluding air and  humidity.

## EXAMPLE  1

A  silicic acid having  a  specific surface of  about 300 m2/g, a pore volume of 1.65 cm/g, and an average

500  ml  of  Diesel oil are  introduced  into  a 1  liter  auto clave provided with  a  flat blade  agitator, the  air  is dis placed by  evacuating and introducing nitrogen under pressure three times  and  the  autoclave  is heated  to 85 C. 1.14  g  of  aluminum  triethyl  and  0.12  g  f he  catalyst o t component  A re added. Hydrogen  is then introduced a until a pressure of 2 bars is attained and ethylene is introduced in an amount  sufficient to maintain a total pressure  of  5.9  bars. After  2  hours  of olymerization  at p 85  C. the polyethylene powder  is separated from the dispersing agent  by  filtration and  dried for 15 hours  at 95°  C. in vacuo. 115 g  of  polyethylene are obtained having  an  is value  of .3  and  a  bulk  density of  330g/1. 9

The yield of  polyethylene was  24,000 g  per 1  g  of titanium or  958g  per 1 g  of  the  catalyst component  A.

## EXAMPLE  2

Ethylene  is polymerized in the  presence  of  0.22  g  of the  catalyst  component  A escribed  in Example  1 under d the same  conditions as in Example 1, but by using in stead of  aluminum  triethyl 1.98  g  of  luminum  triisobu a tyl. After  2  hours  there  are  obtained 145g  of  polyethyl ene having  a melt  index is of  7.9 and  a bulk density of 350  g/1. The  RSV  value  is 1.84 g  dl/g. There  are ob tained per 1 gram  of  titanium 16,600  g  of  polyethylene and  per  gram  of  the  catalyst component  A, 659g.

## EXAMPLE  3

Polymerization of  ethylene  in the  gaseous  phase.

55  are introduced into a lying 80 liter  reactor provided 65  bars  in the  course  of  the  reaction.  There  are  obtained 14 2 kg  of  polyethylene  (is  =  0.8, bulk  density 410  g/l) 1 with  a  scraping  stirrer. The  reactor  is liberated  from  air by  evacuating  several times  and  by  flushing  for  several hours  with  an  ethylene-hydrogen mixture  and  is heated thereafter  to  90° C.  17.1 g f  luminum  triethyl  and  2.41 o a g  of  the catalyst component  A repared according to p Example  1 are  added.  2  kg  of thylene/hour  and  hydro e gen are introduced for a period of 6 hours until the hydrogen  portion is 20%  by  volume. The  polymeriza tion temperature  is 95  C.  The  pressure mounts  to 10.7 kg  of  polyethylene  having  a  melt  index  is of  0.95 and  a bulk density of  435  g/l. A ieve analysis reveals a fine s portion of  0.2%  by  weight  below 100  pum  and  0%  by

9

weight below 50 m. 125,000 g  of polyethylene per gram  of  titanium and  5,809  g  of  polyethylene  per  gram of  the  catalyst component  A re  obtained. a

## COMPARATIVE  EXAMPLE  A

The  example  demonstrates  that  the  catalytic  activity is not  improved  when  using  an  excess  of  titanium  tetra chloride under the conditions indicated in Example 1, while  washing  several  times  the  excess  of  titanium  com ponent.

10

titanium tetrachloride (1.27 mmols per 1  g of  silicic acid)  are  added  and  the  reaction  mixture  is heated  for  7 hours  at  90° C.  while  stirring. Heptane  is withdrawn  in the rotary evaporator and the residue is dried for 2 hours  at 120° C.  under  atmospheric  pressure  and  for  0.5 hour  at 80° C. under  0.5 torr. 8.3 g  of  catalyst  compo nent  A re  obtained. The  titanium  analysis reveals  45.8 a mg  of  titanium per 1 g  of  the  component  A.  The  mag nesium/titanium atomic ratio is 1.3:1.

10.0 g  of  the  silicic acid treated previously with  the Grignard compound  according to Example 1  are sus pended in 50  ml  of  n-heptane  per  gram  of  silicic acid) for  a  period  of  6  hoursat  90° C.  while  stirring under  an argon  atmosphere.  The  insoluble  solid  matter  is  washed  15  isoprenyl (reaction product of  isoprene and  aluminum eight  times  by  decanting  and  stirring  with  each  80  ml  of n-heptane until 10 ml of  the  supernatant solution con tains less than  0.001 mmol  of  titanium compound.  Hep tane  is then  withdrawn  in the  rotary  evaporator  at 120 C. There are obtained 9.7 g of a flowable powder, which  contains  40.1 mg  of  titanium per  gram. Ethylene  is polymerized with Ol.  12 g  of  the  powder obtained under the same conditions as in Example 1. There  are  obtained 80  g  of  polyethylene  having  a  melt index  is of  5.7  and  a  bulk  density  of  295  g/l. There  are  25  index  is  of  5.2  and  is f  28.1.  The  RSV alue  is 1.8  dl/g. obtained 16,600  g  of  polyethylene  per  gram  of  titanium and 666  g  per  gram  of  the  catalyst component  A. COMPARATIVE  EXAMPLE  B The example demonstrates that the activity of the  30  per  gram  of  titanium  and  948g  per  gram  of  the  catalyst 10 500  ml  of  Diesel  oil are  introduced  into  a  1 liter  auto clave  provided  with  a  flat blade  agitator, the  air  is dis placed by  evacuating and introducing nitrogen under pressure  several  times  and  the  contents  of  the  autoclave are  heated  to  85 C.; 10  mmols  of  a  solution  of  luminum a triisobutyl  having  an  aluminum  content  of  15  to 16%  by weight  and  a  C5/C4  of  2.5:1 after  hydrolysis)  are  added. 0.25  g  of  catalyst  component  A  re  then  added. Hydro a gen is introduced until a pressure of  2  bars is attained and ethylene  is added  in an  amount  sufficient to main tain a  total pressure  of  5.9  bars. After  2  hours  the  poly ethylene  powder  is separated  from  the  dispersing  agent by  filtration and  dried for 15 hours  at  95  C.  in vacuo. There  are  obtained  237  g  of olyethylene  having  a  melt p o v The  bulk  density  is 360  g/l, the  air  permeability  0.0058 cm3-sec/g.  The  sieve  analysis reveals  a  portion of  fine particles  having  a  diameter  of  less  than 100 um  of  0.5% by  weight.  There  are  obtained20,700  g  of  polyethylene component  A.

## EXAMPLE  5

6.6  g  of  the  dried  silicic  acid  according  to Example  1  35 are  suspended  in  25  ml  of  n-heptane,  66  ml  of    solution a of  33 mmols  of  n-propyl magnesium  chloride (5 mmols per 1  gram  of  silicic acid)  in  diethyl  ether  are  added  and the  mixture  is refluxed for  4  hours. The  insoluble  solid matter  is  washed  three  times,  each  with  80  ml  of  diethyl ether,  and  two  times, each  with 80  ml  of  n-heptane,  by decanting  and  stirring until no  more  magnesium  can  be detected in the separated solution. The  solvent is then removed  in the rotary evaporator  under 1 torr at 150 C, 45

catalyst is not improved when  using an excess of  the Grignard and titanium compound during the catalyst preparation and  when  removing  the excess of  magne sium  and  titanium  compounds  by  washing  several  times.

Polymerization of  ethylene in the gaseous  phase. Ethylene is polymerized  in the gaseous  phase  in the presence of  2.09 g  of the catalyst component A  pre pared  according  to Example  4  under  the conditions of Example  3. After  6  hours  the  pressure  set  up  is 9.8  bars. There  are obtained 14,000 g  of  polyethylene  having  a melt  index  is  of  0.78  and  a  bulk  density  of  395  g/l. The portion of  fine particles having  a diameter below 100 um  is 0.4%  by  weight.  There  are  obtained 125,000  g  of polyethylene  per  gram  of  titanium  and  6.698g  of  poly ethylene  per  gram  of  the catalyst  component  A.

## EXAMPLE  6

Under  the  same  conditions  as  in Example 1 ethylene is  polymerized  while  using  0.31 g  of he  catalyst  compo t nent  A.  There  are  obtained 166  g  of  polyethylene  hav ing  a  melt  index  is  of .0  and  s  of 1.6.  The ulk  density 4 i 2 b is  310 g/l.  Per gram of titanium there are obtained 19,400 g  of  polyethylene and  per gram  of  the catalyst component  A,  535  g.

The  pulverulent  solid  is  suspended  in 50  ml  of  n-hep tane, mixed with 7.9 g of titanium tetrachloride (6.3 mmols  per 1 gram  of  silicic  acid)  and  stirred  for  7  hours at 90° C.  The  insoluble  solid is then washed  five times, each time with 80 ml of  n-heptane, by decanting and 50 acid) of  n-propyl magnesium chloride in diethyl ether stirring, until less than 0.001  mmol of  titanium com pound  are contained in the supernatant solution. Hep tane  is then  withdrawn  at 120° C.  in  the  rotary  evapora tor. There are obtained 5.8 g  of a flowable powder, which contain 27.6 mg of titanium per gram. The  55  n-heptane, mixed  with 1.65 g  of  titanium tetrachloride atomic ratio between  magnesium  and  titanium is 2.6:1. 8.6  g  of  the  dried  silicic  acid  according  to Example  1 are suspended in 50 ml of  diethyl ether, 13.7 ml of  a solution of  6.8 mmols  (0.79 mmol  per 1  gram  of  silicic are  added  and  the mixture  is refluxed for  3  hours. The solvent is withdrawn  in the rotary evaporator  and  the residue is dried for 2  hours  at 150  C. under 1.5 torrs. The  dried  free  flowing  powder  is suspended  in  50  ml  of (1.0 mmol  per 1  gram  of  silicic acid) and  heated for 7 hours  at  90° C.  while  stirring. The  solvent  is then  with drawn  at 120  C.  in  the rotary  evaporator  and  the  resi due  is  dried  for  0.5  hour  at  80° C.  under  1 torr. 9.6  g  of the free  flowing catalyst component A  is  obtained, which  contains  40.1 mg  of  titanium  per  gram.

## EXAMPLE  4

7.2  g  of  the  silicic  acid  dried  according  to  Example  1, which  has  been  reacted  with  n-propyl  magnesium  chlo ride, are suspended in 50 ml of n-heptane.  1.73 g  of

65  polyethylene  are  obtained having  a  melt  index  is of 1.7 The atomic ratio  of magnesium/titanium is  0.8:1. Ethyleneis  polymerized  undertheconditions  of  Example 1 in  the  presence  of .37  g f  the  component  A.  215  g  of 0 o and  ils of  9.5.  The  bulk  density  is 348  g/1. Per  gram  of titanium there are obtained 14,500 g, per  gram  of  the component  A,  581 g  of  polyethylene.

11

12

EXAMPLE  7 placed  by evacuating and by introducing  nitrogen  5  are  obtained  84  g  of  polyethylene  having  a  bulk  density under  2  torrs. 9.3  g  of  a  powder  having  a  titanium  con tent  of  47.4  mg er  gram  are  obtained. Ethylene  is  poly p merized in the presence of 1.05 g  of  the powder ob tained  under  the  same  conditions  as  in  Example  2.  There of  378  g/l. A elt index is or i15 cannot  be measured. m The  RSV  is 14.5 dl/g. There are obtained 1,700 g  of polyethylene  per  gram  of  titanium  and  80  g er  gram  of p the  catalyst component  A.

## COMPARATIVE  EXAMPLE  D

vacuo.  203  g  of olyethylene  are  obtained  having  a  melt 15  gram  of  silicic acid)  and  by  stirring  the  suspension  for  4 by weight. Per gram of titanium there are obtained 20  titanium compound.  At  the end the solvent is distilled EXAMPLE  8 Comparative Example C  is repeated by  suspending 10.1 g  of  the  dried  silicic  acid  according  to  Example  1 in 86  g  (50  ml)  of itanium tetrachloride  (44.8  mmols  per  1 t hours  at 120° C.  in  an  argon  stream  to remove  hydrogen chloride. The  product  obtained  is washed  seven  times, each time with 80 ml of  n-hexane, until  10 ml of  the supernatant solution contain less than 0.001  mmol of off  at 100  C. under  atmospheric  pressure  and  the resi due  is dried for  0.5  hour  at  80° C.  and  under  a  pressure of  0.5  torr. 10.8g  of   free  flowing  powder  are  obtained a having  a  titanium content  of  35.5 mg er  gram. p

Into  a  1 liter  autoclave  made  from  stainless  steel  there are  introduced 500 ml  of  Diesel oil, and the air is dis under  pressure  three times. Thereafter  the  autoclave  is heated  to  85  C. 1.14  g  of  aluminum  triethyl and  0.12  g of the catalyst component A  prepared according to Example 6 are added. Hydrogen is introduced until a pressure  of  5  bars  is  attained  and  ethylene  is introduced 10 in an  amount  sufficient to maintain a total pressure of 16.7  bars. After  2  hours  of olymerization  at  85  C.  the p polyethylene  powder  is  separated  by  filtration from  the dispersing agent and dried for 15 hours at 95  C. in p index is of 1.1 and a bulk density of  430  g/l. The  air permeability  of  the  polyethylene  powder  is 0.012  cm3.sec/g.  The  sieve  analysis reveals  a  portion  of ine  parti f cles  having  a  diameter  below  100 um  of  less  than  0.1% 42,200  g  of  polyethylene,  per  gram  of  the  catalyst  com ponent  A, 1,692 g.

acted  with 1.5g  of  titanium  tetrachloride  (1.0  mmol  per 30  obtained 2,500  g  of  polyethylene per  gram  of  titanium Ethylene  is polymerized  in the  presence  of  1.45 g  of the  powder  obtained under  the  conditions described in Example 2. There  are obtained 130 g  of  polyethylene having  a bulk  density of  394  g/l. A elt  index  is  or  i15 m cannot  be measured.  The  RSV  is  17.2 dll/g. There  are and  90  g  per  gram  of  the  catalyst component  A.

## COMPARATIVE  EXAMPLE  E

Ethylene  is polymerized  in the  presence  of  0.44  g  of  35  9.8g  of  the  dried  silicic  acid  according  to Example  1 in the powder obtained under the same conditions as in Example 1. There  are obtained 182 g  of  polyethylene powder  having  a  melt  index  is  of  1.7  and  is f  12.9.  The o bulk  density  is 285  g/l. Per  gram  of  titanium there ob tained 10,400  g f  polyethylene,  per  gram  of  the  catalyst 40  10 ml of  the supernatant solution contains less  than o component  A,  414  g. EXAMPLE  9 Comparative Example C  is repeated by  suspending 50  ml  of  n-heptane,  adding  18.6  g  (10  mmols  per 1 gram of  silicic acid)  of itanium  tetrachloride  and  stirring  the t mixture for  7  hours  at  90° C.  The  product obtained is washed  five  times  with  each  time  80  ml  of eptane  until h 0.001 mmol  of  titanium  compounds.  At  the  end  heptane is  withdrawn  in  the  rotary  evaporator  at  120° C.  and  the residue  is  dried  for  0.5  hour t  80 C.  under    pressure  of a a 0.7 torr.  10.2 g  of  a  free flowing  powder  are obtained

The  catalyst is prepared  in analogous  manner  to Ex- 25 ample  6, but  by  reacting 7.9  g  of  the dried  silicic acid with 6.3 ml  of  a  solution of  3.2 mmols  of  n-propyl  mag nesium  chloride  (0.4  mmols  per  1 gram  of  silicic acid)  in diethyl ether. Thereafter the product obtained is  re 1  gram  of  silicic acid). There are obtained 9.0 g  of  a flowable  catalyst  component  A hich  contains  39.9  mg w of  titanium  per  gram.  The  atomic  ratio  of  magnesium/titanium is 0.41:1.

Ethylene  is  polymerized  under  the  same  conditions  as in Example  2  in the presence of  0.54  g  of  the catalyst 45  having  a  titanium content  of  37.7 mg  per  gram. component  A repared  according  to Example  8. There p are  obtained 193g  of  polyethylene  having  a  melt  index is of  0.44  and  i15  of .6. The  RSV  value  is  2.88  gl/g, the 3 bulk  density  about  305  dl. Per  gram  of  titanium  there  are obtained  9,000  g  of  polyethylene,  per  gram  of  the  com- 50  sured.  The  RSV s 12.2  dll/g. Per  gram  of itanium  there ponent  A,  357  g. Ethylene  is polymerized under  the  conditions  of  Ex ample  2  in  the  presence  of  1.21 g  of aid  powder.  There s are obtained 118 g  of  polyethylene having  a  bulk  den sity of  292  dll/g. A elt  index  is  and  is  cannot  be  mea m i t are obtained 2,600 g, per  gram  of  the catalyst compo nent A  98  g  of  polyethylene.

## EXAMPLE  10

## COMPARATIVE  EXAMPLE  C

The Example demonstrates that the catalysts  ob tained are not very active, when using a silicic acid 55 which has not been treated  preliminarily  with  the Grignard compound. Moreover, the sensitivity to hy drogen of  the catalyst is so low  that the polyethylene formed has  such  a  high molecular  weight  that it is un suitable for processing by injection molding or extru- 60  solvent  is withdrawn  in  the  rotary  evaporator  at 120° C. S1O. 8.7  g  of  the  dried  silicic  acid  according  to Example  1 are  suspended  in 50  ml  of  n-heptane  and 1.65 g  of  tita nium tetrachloride (1 mmol  per 1  g  of  silicic acid) are added. The  mixture is heated at 90° C. while stirring 65  Example 2 in the presence of 0.44 g of the powder under an argon atmosphere for a period of  7 hours. Heptane is then withdrawn in a rotary evaporator at 120  C. and the residue is dried for 0.5 hour  at 80  C. 8.2 g  of  the  dried  silicic acid, which  has  been  reacted with n-propyl magnesium  chloride  according  to Exam ple 1 are  suspended  in  70  ml  of -heptane  and  1.60  g  (1.0 n mmol per 1  g of silicic  acid) of TiCl3(OiC3H7) are added. The  mixture is stirred for 6  hours  at  90°  C.  The and  the residue is dried for 0.5 hour  at 80  C. under  2 torrs. 9.26 g of a free flowing powder are obtained having  a titanium content of  39.4 mg  per  gram. Ethyl ene is polymerized under the conditions described in obtained. There are obtained 145 g of polyethylene having  a melt  index  is of  0.50  and  a  bulk  density  of  380 g/l. Per  gram  of  titanium there  are obtained  8,400  g  of

3

polyethylene, per gram of  the catalyst component A, 330  g.

## EXAMPLE  11

Ethylene is polymerized under the conditions de scribed in Example  4  in the presence of  0.62 g  of  the catalyst component  A repared according  to Example p 10. There  are obtained 186  g  of  polyethylene  having  a melt  index  is of  0.70,  i15  of .57  and  a  bulk  density  of  67 4 3 polyethylene,  per  gram  of  component  A,  300  g.

14

nent A  prepared according to Example 13. There  are obtained 135  g  of  polyethylene  having  a  melt  index  is  of 2.3 and  a  bulk  density of  345  g/l. Per  gram  of  titanium there  are  obtained 6,200  g, per  gram  of  the component A,  241 g  of  polyethylene.

## EXAMPLE  16

g/l. Per  gram  of  titanium  there  are  obtained  7,600  g  of 10  t-butyl magnesium  chloride (1.47 mmols  per 1 gram  of EXAMPLE  12 Polymerization of  ethylene  in the  gaseous  phase. Ethylene  is polymerized  under  the conditions  of  Ex  15  n-heptane, 1.17 g  (1 mmol of  titanium per 1  gram of ample  3  in the  presence  of  2.4  g  f  the  catalyst  compo o ment A  prepared according to  Example 10.  After 6 hours  the  pressure  is  20.7  bars.  There  are  obtained  14  kg of  polyethylene  having  a  melt  index  is  of .33  and  a  bulk 0 density of 465 g/1.  The polyethylene powder has a 20  0.5  hour  at  80 C.  under  a  pressure  of  0.4  torr.  There  are portion of  fine particles having  a  diameter  of  less than 100 um  of  0.1%  by  weight. Per  gram  of  titanium  there are  obtained 127,000  g,  per  gram  of  the  catalyst  compo nent A,  5,833  g  of  polyethylene. 6.2  g  of he  dried  silicic acid  according  to Example  1 t are suspended in 50 ml of  a solution of  9.1 mmols  of silicic acid) in diethyl ether and  refluxed for one  hour while stirring. The  solvent is  withdrawn in a rotary evaporator  and  the  residue  is  dried  for  2 ours  at  120° C. h under  0.3  torr. The  dried  solid  is suspended  in 50  ml  of silicic acid)  of  titanium-tetrachloride  are  added  and  the mixture  is stirred for  6  hours  at  90° C. Heptane  is  with drawn  in a rotary evaporator  and the  solid is dried for 2  hours  at 120° C. under  atmospheric  pressure and  for obtained 7.7 g  of  a  dry  free flowing  powder  having  a titanium  content  of  38.5  mg er  gram.  The  atomic  ratio p of  magnesium  and  titanium is 1.5:1.

## EXAMPLE  13

110  g  of  the  dried  silicic acid  which  has  been  reacted with n-propyl magnesium  chloride  according  to Exam ple 1 are  suspended  in 700  ml  of  n-heptane  and  26  g  (1 mmol  of  titanium  per  1 gram  of ilicic  acid  charged  with  30  polyethylene. s magnesium)  of  TiCl2(OiC3H7)2  are  added.  The  mixture is  stirred  for  6  hours  at  90° C.  The olvent  is withdrawn s in the rotary evaporator at 120° C. and the residue is dried for  2  hours  at 80  C.  under 1  torr. There  are  ob titanium content  of  39.1 mg  per  gram.

25  ample  2  in the presence of  0.42 g  of  the powder  pre Ethylene is polymerized under  the  conditions  of  Ex pared.  There  are  obtained  212  g  of  polyethylene  having a  melt  index  is  of .26  and  is  of  1.7.  The  ulk  density  is 0 b 364  g/l. Per  gram  of  titanium there  are  obtained 1,300  g of  polyethylene,  per  gram  of  the  component  A,  504  g  of

## EXAMPLE  17

tained  124 g of  a dry free flowing powder having a  35  average  particle size of  50 um  is dried  for  4  hours  in a Ethylene  is polymerized  under  the  conditions  of  Ex ample 2 in the presence of  0.35 g  of  the powder ob tained.  There  are  obtained 130g  of  polyethylene  having a  melt  index  is  of .1,  is  f  15.8  and  a  ulk  density  of 90  40  pended  in  30  ml  of  diethyl ether. 49  ml  of  a  solution  of 2 o b 3 g/1. The  density is 0.960  g/cm3. Per  gram  of  titanium there are  obtained  9,500  g  of  polyethylene, per  gram  of the component  A,  371 g  of  polyethylene. EXAMPLE  14 num triethyl and 12.25 g  of  the catalyst component  A  50  and  the  residue  is dried  for  one  hour  at  80 C.  under  0.8 45  solid matter is dried for 2 hours at 120° C. under  0.3 A  porous silicic acid having a specific surface of about 300 m2/g, a pore volume of  1.65 cm/g  and  an fluidized  bed  in  an  argon  flow,  at  350° C.  and  thereafter allowed  to  stand  under  an  argon  atmosphere.  The ilicic s acid contains thereafter 1.9 mmols  of  hydroxyl  groups per gram. 9.94 g  of  the silicic acid obtained are sus 18.2 mmols  (1.83 mmols  of  magnesium  per 1 g  of  silicic acid)  of  phenyl  magnesium  bromide  in diethyl  ether  are added  and  the mixture is heated while refluxing. The solvent is withdrawn in the rotary evaporator and  the torr. The  pretreated  silicic acid  is  suspended  in  50  ml  of n-heptane and 1.89 g of titanium  tetrachloride  (1.0 mmol  per 1 g  of  silicic acid)  are  added.  The  mixture  is stirred for 4  hours at 90°  C., the  solvent is withdrawn torr. There  are obtained 12.6 g  of  a  flowable powder having a titanium content of  36.8 mg  per gram. The atomic ratio of  magnesium/titanium is 1.8:1.

is moreover  introduced  at  a  rate  of 0  g/h.  The  pressure  55  ample  2 in the presence of  0.45 g  of  the powder  pre Ethylene is polymerized under  the  conditions of  Ex pared.  There  are  obtained 175  g  of  polyethylene  having a  melt  index is of  1.73 and  its  of  12.6. The  bulk  density is  355 g/l, the air permeability of  the powder  0.0058 cm-sec/g. Per gram of titanium there are obtained 10,600  g  of  polyethylene,  per  gram  of he  component  A, t 390  g  of  polyethylene.

## EXAMPLE  18

Copolymerization of  ethylene and  butene-1. 100  liters of  Diesel oil are  placed  in  a  100  liter vessel, the  contents  of he  vessel  are  heated  to  85 C.  and  the  air t is displaced by  flushing  with  nitrogen. 45.6  g  of  alumi prepared according  to Example 13 are added. 5 kg  of ethylene are introduced for a period of  6  hours  and  a quantity  of  hydrogen  such  that  the  hydrogen  part  in  the gaseous  phase  is 15%  by  volume  is introduced. Butene-1 5 mounts  to 5.2 bars  in the course  of  the  polymerization. The  suspension is separated from the dispersing agent by  a  pressure  filter and  the  polymer  is dried in a  fluid ized  bed  dryer.  There  are  obtained  28.5  kg f  polyethyl o ene  having  an RSV  of  2.8 dl/g  and a density of  0.946 g/cm3.  The  bulk  density  is  450  g/l. Pergram  of  titanium there are  obtained  59,500  g  of  copolymer  based  on  eth ylene  and  butene-1,  per  gram  of he  catalyst  component t A,  2,326  gram  of  copolymer.

## EXAMPLE  1.5

Ethylene is polymerized  under  the  conditions  of  Ex ample  4  in  the  presence  of .56  g f  the  catalyst  compo 0 o

65  ample  4 y  means  of  0.48g  of  the  catalyst  component  A Ethylene  is polymerized under  the  conditions  of  Ex b prepared  according  to Example  17. There  are  obtained 224  g  of  polyethylene  having  a  melt  index  is of  2.1 and i15  of  12.9. The ulk  density  is  340  g/1,  the  air  permeabil b

5

ity of  the  powder .077  cm3-sec/g. Pergram  of  titanium 0 there  are  obtained 12,700  g, per  gram  of  the  component A,  467  g, of  polyethylene.

## EXAMPLE  19

A porous aluminum silicate  (85.7%  of SiO2 and 14.2% of  Al2O3)  having  a  specific surface  of  about  550 m2/g, a pore volume of 0.71  cm/g  and an average particle size  of  135 um  is dried  in  a  fluidized bed  in an argon flow for 4  hours, at 460" C. and kept under an  10 argon  atmosphere. Thereafter  it contains 3.0 mmols  of hydroxyl  groups  per  gram.

600  g  of  the  silicate obtained  are  suspended  in 3  liters of  diethyl  ether, 1.3  liters  of  a olution  of  1.79  mols  (2.98 s mmols  per 1 g  of  silicate) of  n-propyl magnesium  chlo  15 ride in diethyl ether are added and the mixture is re fluxed for one  hour  while  stirring. After  settling of  the solid  matter  no  magnesium  can  be  detected  in  the  super natant  solution. The  solvent  is withdrawn  in the rotary evaporator  and  the  residue  is  dried  for  2  hours  at 120° C. under  0.5 torr. The  carrier  pretreated is suspended  in 5 liters of  cyclohexane, 182 g of  titanium tetrachloride (1.6 mmols  of  titanium per 1  g  of  silicic acid)  are  added in 2  hours  and  the  mixture  is stirred for  6  hours  at 100 C. 20 25

- (2) reacting the solid reaction product of  step (1) in suspension  with  a  halogen-containing  titanium compound  of  the  formula  TiXOR)4-n,  wherein  n is  an  integer  of  rom  1 to  4,  X  s chlorine  or  bromine f i and R1 is hydrocarbon of from 1  to 12 carbon atoms, in an  amount  of  from  0.01 to 1  mol  of  said titanium compound  per  mol  of  hydroxyl  groups  of the silicon  dioxide,  aluminum oxide or mixture thereof,  and  in  an  amount  such  that  the  atomic  ratio of  magnesium  to  titanium  in  the  reaction  product  is in the range  of  from  0.1 to 10; and

The  solvent  is withdrawn  at 120° C.  and  the  residue  is dried  for  one  hour  at  90° C.  under  a  pressure  of .5  torr. 0 There  are  obtained 880  g  of  a  flowable powder  having a titanium content of 51.2 mg  per gram. The  atomic ratio between  magnesium  and  titanium is 1.86:1.

- (3) reacting the product of  step (2) with  a  sufficient amount  of  an  aluminum-organic compound  which is a compound  of  the formula AIR36  or AIR26H, R6 being hydrocarbon of from 1  to  16 carbon atoms, a compound of the formula R25A1C) or R35Al2Cl3, Rs  being  hydrocarbon  of  from 1 to 16 carbon atoms, or a product of  the reaction of  an aluminum  trialkyl or  an  aluminum  dialkyl hydride, wherein  said  alkyl is of rom 1 to 16  carbon  atoms, f with  a  diene  of  from  4  to 20  carbon  atoms  to pro duce  a  catalyst which is active in polymerizing  a 1-olefin.
- Ethylene  is polymerized under  the  conditions  of  Ex ample  2  in  the  presence  of  0.23g  of  said  catalyst  compo nent A.  There  are obtained 169  g  of  polyethylene  hav ing  a  melt  index  is  of  0.85  and  a  bulk  density  of  315  g/l. Per gram of  titanium there are obtained 14,400 g, per  35  an amount of  from 0.5 to  10 mmols  per liter of  said gram  of  the  component  A,  735  g, of  polyethylene 30  uct  of tep  (2)  and  the  aluminum-organic  compound  are 2.  The  process  as  defined  in  claim  1  wherein  the  prod s reacted during  polymerization and the product  of  step (2) is present in an  amount  of  from  0.005 to 1.5 mmols per  liter  of  reactor  volume  or  an  inert  solvent  dispersing agent  and  the  aluminum-organic  compound  is  present  in reactor volume  or  said inert solvent dispersing  agent.

## EXAMPLE  20

Polymerization of  ethylene in the  gaseous  phase. 2 kg  of  polyethylene (is  =  0.8, bulk  density  410  g/l) 1 are  placed  in  a  lying  80  liter reactor, which  is provided with  a  scraping  stirrer. The  reactor  is liberated from  air by  evacuating  several times  and  by  flushing  for  several hours with an ethylene/hydrogen mixture and heated thereafter  to  90° C. 17.1 g  luminum  triethyl  and  2.8g  of  45  dioxide,  aluminum  oxide,  or  mixture  thereof, has  a  con a the  catalyst  component  A repared  according  to Exam p ple 19 are thereafter placed in the reactor. Ethylene is introduced  into the reactor  at  a  rate of  2  kg/hour  for  a period of  6  hours  and  hydrogen  is introduced until the hydrogen  portion is 20%  by  volume. The  polymeriza  50  hydrocarbon  of  from  2  to 10 carbon  atoms. tion temperature  is 105  C.  The  pressure mounts  in the course  of  the  polymerization  to  9.8  bars. 14  kg  of  oly p ethylene  are  obtained  having  a  melt  index  is  of  0.98  and a  bulk  density  of  415  g/l. Per  gram  of itanium  there  are t component  A,  5,000 g  of  polyethylene. 4. A  compound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as defined in claim 1. 5. A rocess  as  defined  in  claim  1,  wherein  said  silicon p tent of  hydroxyl  of  from 1  to  20  mmols/g. 6. A  compound  prepared  according  to the  process  as defined in claim 5. 7.  The  process as defined in claim 1, wherein R  is 8. A  compound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as defined in claim 7.

- 3.  The  process  as  defined  in  claim  2  herein  the  prod w uct  of  step (2) and  the  aluminum-organic  compound  are reacted before polymerization and  the product  of  step (2) is reacted in a molar  ratio to the  aluminum-organic compound  of  from 1:0.2 to 1:3.
- obtained 83,700 g of polyethylene, per gram of the  55  -20 to 150°  C. and reacts with the silicon dioxide, What  is claimed is: 9. The  process as defined in claim 1, wherein said magnesium  compound  is added  at  a  temperature  of  from aluminum oxide, or mixture thereof, for a period of from  0.5  to  20  hours;  and  the  product  of uch  reaction  is s reacted  with said  halogen-containing  titanium  com pound  at a  temperature  of  from  20  to 140° C.
- 1.  In a process for the preparation of  a  catalyst by reacting  the reaction product  of  silicon dioxide, alumi num  oxide, or  a  mixture  thereof, and  (a) a  halogen-con  60 taining magnesium-organic compound and (b) a halo gen  compound  of  a  transition metal,  with  an  aluminum organic  compound,  the improvement  which  comprises
- 10.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined in claim 9.
- (1)  reacting silicon  dioxide, aluminum oxide, or a mixture thereof,  having a content  of hydroxyl  65 groups  of  from  0.5 to 50  mmols/g,  in the  presence of  a diluent, with  a  magnesium-organic  compound of  the  formula RMgX,  wherein R  is hydrocarbon
- 11. The  process as defined in claim 1, wherein R1  is alkyl of  up  to 12 carbon  atoms,  aryl of  up  to 12  carbon atoms or  aralkyl of  up  to 12 carbon  atoms.
- 12.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined in claim 11.
- 13. The  process  as  defined  in claim  1, wherein R1  is straight or  branched  alkyl of  from 1  to  8  carbon  atoms.

16

of  from 1  to 20 carbon atoms and  X  is chlorine, bromine  or  iodine,  in  an  amount  of  from  0.1 to  0.95 mol  of  said  magnesium-organic  compound  per  mol of  hydroxyl groups of  the silicon dioxide, alumi num  oxide  or  mixture thereof;

17

- 14.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined in claim 13.
- 15. A rocess  as defined  in claim 1, wherein R*  and p R6  are  alkyl  of  from 1 to 16  carbon  atoms.
- 16.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined in claim 15.
- 17. The  process  as defined in claim 15, wherein the alkyl of  the  aluminum  trialkyl or  the  aluminum  dialkyl hydride  is of  from  4  to  8  carbon  atoms  and  the  diene  is phellandrene or of  the  formula

18

- 21. The  process  as defined in claim 15, wherein  said silicon  dioxide,  aluminum  oxide,  or  mixture  thereof, has a  content  of  hydroxyl  of  from 1 to  20  mmols/g.
- 22.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined  in claim  21.
- 23. The  process  as  defined in claim  15, wherein R s i hydrocarbon  of  from  2  to 10  carbon  atoms.
- 24.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined  in claim  23.

<!-- image -->

wherein R2  and R2 each is hydrogen, alkyl, alkylene having a non-terminal double bond or mononuclear aryl, and  a  is 0  or 1.

- 10 15  reacted with said  halogen-containing titanium  com 25. The  process  as  defined in claim 15, wherein  said magnesium  compound  is  added  at  a  temperature  of  from -20' to 150  C. and reacts with the silicon dioxide, aluminum oxide, or mixture thereof, for a period of from  0.5  to  20  hours,  and  the  product  of  uch  reaction  is s pound  at  a  temperature  of  from  20 to 140  C.
- 26.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined in claim  25.
- 18.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c define  in claim 17.
- 20  alkyl of  up  to 12  carbon  atoms,  aryl of  up  to 12  carbon 27.  The  process  as  defined  in claim 15,  wherein  R1  is atoms  or  aralkyl  of  up  to 12  carbon  atoms.
- 28.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined  in claim  27.
- 25  straight  or  branched  alkyl of  from 1 to  8  carbon  atoms. 29. The  process  as  defined  in claim  27,  wherein  R1  is
- 20.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined in claim 19.
- 19. The  process as defined in claim 15, wherein  the said aluminum trialkyl  is  aluminum triisobutyl,  said aluminum dialkyl hydride is aluminum diisobutyl hy dride  and  said diene  is isoprene.
- 30.  A ompound  prepared  according  to  the  process  as c defined in claim  21.

k

s

s

k

k

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65