## United States Patent (19) Werner  et al.

## 54 PREPARATION  OF  HOMO-  AND COPOLYMERS  OF  PROPENE  USINGA ZEGLER-NATTA  CATALYST  SYSTEM

- (75) Inventors:

Rainer  A.  Werner, Bad  Durkheim; Ralf  Zolk, Hessheim,  both  of  Fed. Rep. of  Germany

- 73) Assignee:

BASF  Aktiengesellschaft, Ludwigshafen, Fed. Rep. of Germany

- (21) Appl.  No.:  176,861
- 22 Filed:

Apr. 1, 1988

## (30) Foreign  Application Priority Data

Apr.  8, 1987  (DE) Fed. Rep. of  Germany  .......  3711919

- (51l

Int. Cl* ...............................................  C08F  /64 4

502/120

- 52

U.S.  Cl. ....................................  526/125;  526/351;

- 58) Field of  Search ................................  526/125, 351

## (56) References  Cited

## U.S. PATENT  DOCUMENTS

| 4,113,933   | 9/1978   | Schweier et al. ...............   | 526/125 X   |
|-------------|----------|-----------------------------------|-------------|
| 4,399,054   | 8/1983   | Ferraris et al. ....              | 526/125 X   |
| 4,431,571   | 2/1984   | Karayannis ........ - - - -       | 526/125 X   |
| 4,467,044   | 8/1984   | Band ..........                   | 52.6/125 X  |
| 4,579,919   | 4/1986   | Staiger et al...........          | 52.6/124 X  |

52.6/124  X

## FOREIGN  PATENT  DOCUMENTS

|   543049 | 3/1985   | Australia .          |
|----------|----------|----------------------|
|    14523 | 8/1980   | European Pat. Off. . |
|    17895 | 10/1980  | European Pat. Off. . |
|    45977 | 2/1982   | European Pat. Off... |
|   144021 | 6/1985   | European Pat. Off. . |

4,843,132 Jun.  27, 1989

11 Patent  Number:

(45) Date of Patent:

|   0171200 | 2/1986   | European Pat. Off.   |
|-----------|----------|----------------------|
|   0206172 | 12/1986  | European Pat. Off.   |
|   2049709 | 12/1980  | United Kingdom .     |
|   2101609 | 1/1983   | United Kingdom       |
|   2101611 | 1/1983   | . United Kingdom     |
|   2143834 | 2/1985   | . United Kingdom .   |

Primary Examiner-Patrick P. Garvin

Attorney, Agent, or Firm-Keil  &amp;  Weinkauf

## 57 ABSTRACT

Polymers  of  propene  are  prepared  using  a  Ziegler-Natta catalyst system consisting of  (1) a  titanium component which contains titanium,  magnesium, chlorine and a benzenecarboxylic acid derivative on a carrier, (2) an aluminum  component  and  (3) a  silane component.  The process employs a titanium component (1) which is obtained by  a  method  in which  (1.1) first a  solid-phase intermediate is prepared from ()  magnesium  chloride, (II)  an  alkanol,  (III)  a  carrier  which  in  turn  consists  of a finely divided inorganic oxide carrier material which has been pretreated with an alkylchlorosilane,  (IV) titanium tetrachloride and (V) a phthalic acid deriva tive, in such a  way  that (1.1.1) first (I) is reacted with (II), (1.1.2) then  the carrier (III) is introduced into the substance resulting from (1.1.1), (1.1.3) thereafter the solid-phase substance resulting from (1.1.2) is reacted with  (IV)  in  a  liquid  hydrocarbon,  with  the  proviso  that (V)  is also  introduced  in (1.1.1) or  (1.1.2) or  (1.1.3), the (1.2) the solid-phase substance resulting from (1.1) is extracted with titanium tetrachloride, and finally the solid-phase substance resulting from (1.2) is extracted with  a  liquid hydrocarbon.

## 1 Claim,  No  Drawings

1.

## PREPARATION  OF  HOMO-  AND  COPOLYMERS OF  PROPENE  USINGAZEGLER-NATA CATALYST  SYSTEM

The present invention relates to a process for the preparation of  homopolymers  of  propene and  copoly mers  of  propene  with  minor  amounts  of  other  C2-C12-a. monoolefins,  in  particular  C2-C6-a-monoolefins,  by polymerization,  in particular  dry-phase  polymerization,  10 of  the  monomer  or  monomers  at  from  20'  to 160 C,  in particular  from  50 to 120° C.,  and  under  from 1 to 100 in particular from 20  to 70, bar using a Ziegler-Natta catalyst  system consisting of

- (1) a titanium component which contains titanium,  15 magnesium,  chlorine and  a  benzenecarboxylic  acid de rivative on  a  carrier,
- (2) an  aluminum  component  of  the  formula

AR3,

20

where  R  is alkyl of  not more  than 8, in particular not more  than  4, carbon  atoms, and

- (3) a  silane component  of  the formula

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

25

where R1 is an aryl, alkylaryl or alkyl radical of  not more than  16,  preferably not more than  10,  carbon atoms, in particular phenyl, tolyl or  ethylphenyl, R2  is alkyl of  not  more  than  15,  preferably not  more  than  8, in particular not  more  than  4, carbon  atoms  and n is from 0  to  3, preferably  from  0  to  2, in particular 1 to  2, with the  provisos that the  atomic ratio of  titanium from the titanium component (1) to aluminum from the alumi num  component  (2) is from 1:10  to 1:800, in particular from 1:20 to 1:200, and the molar ratio of  aluminum component  (2) to  silane  component  (3)  is from 1:0.03 to 1:08,  in  particular from 1:0.05 to 1:0.5.

2

case, for example, with the process according to U.S. Pat. No.  4,399,054, or  when  other  aims  are neglected.

For example, British Pat. No. 2,049,709 discloses a process  in which  a  magnesium  halide, a  titanium  halide and  an  electron donor  are  applied to a  metal  oxide  car rier.  However, the polymer obtained has a compara tively low  isotacticity.

European Laid-Open application  Nos.  14,523 and 171,200 and British Pat. Nos. 2,101,609 and 2,101,611 describe catalyst  systems  whose  titanium component  is obtained by treating a solid, inorganic oxide with an organic magnesium compound, a Lewis base and tita nium  tetrachloride, it being  necessary  in  addition  to use a  halogenating  agent  which  is not  titanium  tetrachloride and/or  an  organic compound  of  the  metals  boron,  alu minum,  silicon or  tin or  a  boron  trihalide or  a  halogen containing alcohol. Despite an expensive and tedious preparation procedure, the productivity of  the corre sponding  catalyst  system  is unsatisfactory.

30  are, in absolute  terms, low. U.S. Pat. No. 4,467,044 discloses a  catalyst system which contains, as a titanium component, a silica car rier, a magnesium halide and/or manganese halide, a titanium halide and  an electron donor. In order  to ob tain catalyst systems  having relatively high productiv ity, additional treatment with an organometallic com pound  of  a  metal  of  groups  I to  III of  the  periodic  table is indispensable here. However, the productivity and stereospecificity  of  the  catalysts  prepared  in  this  manner

35

The  known  processes  are  thus unsatisfactory, in par ticular with regard to high isotacticity and good mor phology  coupled  with  good  productivity.

It is an object of  the present invention to provide a titanium  component  which,  compared  with  the  prior  art processes,  has  high  productivity  and  is at  the  same  time capable  of  giving  polymers  having  high  isotacticity  and good morphology.

45  kylchlorosilane, (IV) titanium tetrachloride and (V) a We  have  found  that  this object  is achieved  by  a  cata lyst system which contains a titanium component (1) prepared  in three  stages  in  a  particular manner  from  (I) magnesium chloride, (II) a certain alkanol, (III) a cer tain carrier comprising finely divided inorganic oxide carrier material which has been pretreated with an al specially selected phthalic  acid derivative.

Polymerization processes of this type are known; their special feature compared  with other similar pro cesses  is the  special embodiment  of  the  catalyst  system, and the processes disclosed in  European Laid-Open application  Nos. 17,895  and  144,021, European  Pat. No. 45,977,  Australian Pat. No.  543,049  and British Pat. No. 2,143,834 may  be  mentioned  as  prototypes  for  the  pres ent case.

The  special embodiments  of  the catalyst systems  are produced in order to achieve  certain aims, such  as the following: The catalyst system should be easy to prepare and  50  other  C2-C12-a-monoolefins,  in  particular  C2-C6-agive  an  increased  yield of  polymer  having  a  very  large isotactic fraction. In addition, particularly because of the thermodynamics of  the procedure, easy molecular weight regulation, in particular with hydrogen, is of great importance. 55  Ziegler-Natta  catalyst  consisting  of The  present invention accordingly relates to a pro cess for the preparation of  homopolymers  of  propene and copolymers of propene with minor amounts of monoolefins,  by  polymerization,  in  particular  dry-phase polymerization, of  the monomer  or  monomers  at from 20 to 160  C., in particular  from  50 to 120° C., under from 1 to 100, in particular from  20  to 70, bar using a

- (1) a titanium component which contains titanium, magnesium, chlorine  and  a  benzenecarboxylic acid de rivative on  a  carrier,
- (2) an  aluminum  component  of  the formula

AR3, where R  is alkyl of  not more  than 8, in particular not more  than 4, carbon  atoms,

The  catalyst system should moreover  produce  poly mers having special morphological properties, for ex ample  uniform  particle size and/or  smaller  fractions  of very  fine particles and/or  a  high bulk  density. In  addi tion to these parameters  which  are important for con  60 trolling the polymerization systems, working up the polymers and/or processing the latter, a low halogen content in the polymer is of importance, particularly with  regard  to  corrosion  problems;  this  can  be  achieved by  increasing the polymer  yield and/or  by  means  of  a  65  and catalyst system  which  contains very  little halogen.

Some  of  these  aims  can  be  achieved  by  the  prior art only by means of very expensive processes, as is the

- (3) a  silane component  of  the  formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

3

4.

where R is an aryl, alkylaryl or alkyl radical of  not more than 16,  preferably not more than 10, carbon atoms, in particular phenyl, tolyl or ethylphenyl, R2  is alkyl  of  not  more  than 15,  preferably  not  more  than  8,  in particular not  more  than  4, carbon  atoms  and  n  is from 0  to 3, preferably from  0  to  2, in particular 1  or  2, with  the  provisos  that the  atomic  ratio of  titanium  from the titanium component  (1) to aluminum from the alu minum  component  (2)  is from 1:10  to 1:800,  in  particular  10  sium  chloride  (I), and  the  combined  substances  are  kept from 1:20 to 1:200, and the molar ratio of  aluminum component  (2) to  silane  component  (3) is from 1:0.03 to 1:0.8, in particular from 1:0.05 to 1:0.5. 5 (1.1.1.a)  in  a  first  substage,  the  magnesium  chloride  (I) and the alkanol (II) are combined  in a liquid inert hy drocarbon, in particular an  alkane, with constant thor ough  mixing  at  from  0 to 140 C.,  in particular  from  40 to 120° C.,  from  20  to 1,000,  in  particular  from  50  to  400, parts by  weight  of  the hydrocarbon  being used  per 10 parts  by  weight  of  the  magnesium  chloride  (I) and  from 10  to 80, in particular from  20  to 60, molar  parts of  the alkanol (II) being  used  per  10  molar  parts  of  the magne at  from  20' to 140  C.,  in  particular  from  40 to 120° C., for  from  0.1 to  6,  in  particular  from  0.2  to  2, hours,  after which

(1.1)  in  a first  stage,  a solid-phase intermediate is prepared from

In  the  novel  process,  the  titanium  component  (1) used is one  which  is obtained  by  a method  in which  first

(I) finely divided magnesium chloride, (II) a C1-C8 alkanol,  preferably  a C2-C6-alkanol,  in  particular  a C2-C4-alkanol,

15  duced  into the reaction mixture resulting from  the  first 20  magnesium chloride (I), (1.1.2.a)  in  a  second  substage,  the  carrier  (III) is intro Substage, with constant thorough mixing at from 0 to 140  C., in particular from 40  to 120°  C., from 20 to 100,  in  particular  from  30  to 60, parts  by  weight  of  the carrier (III) being used per 10 parts by weight of  the or  (b)

35  100, in particular  from  30  to 60, parts  by  weight  of  the (1.1.2.b)  in  a  second  substage,  the  carrier  (III) is intro duced into the reaction mixture resulting from  the first substage with constant thorough mixing at from 0  to 140  C., in particular from 40  to 120°  C., from 20 to carrier (III) being used per 10 parts by weight of  the magnesium  chloride  (I), and  the  entire  mixture  is evapo rated  to  dryness  with  recovery  of  a  solid-phase  reaction product, and  thereafter

25  from 40  to 120°  C., from 100 to 1,000, in particular 30  6, in particular from 0.2 to 2, hours, after which (1.1.1.b) in a first substage, the magnesium chloride (I)  and the alkanol (II)  are combined with constant thorough mixing at from 0  to  140  C., in particular from 150 to 500 molar parts of  the alkanol (II) being used  per 10  molar  parts  of  the  magnesium  chloride (I), and the combined substances are kept at from 20' to 140°C., in  particular  from  40 to 120° C.,  for  from  0.1 to the carrier  material  and the alkylchlorosilane are combined  with  constant  thorough  mixing  at  from  20 to 140  C.,  in  particular from  40 to 100  C., from  5  to  50, in particular from 10 to 40, molar parts of the alkyl chlorosilane  being  used  per  10  molar  parts  of  the  carrier material, and the combined substances are kept at a temperature in the stated range for from 0.1 to 5, in particular  from  0.4  to  2, hours,  and  the  resulting  solid  is then isolated as  the  carrier (III),

(III) a  carrier consisting of  a  finely divided, porous, inorganic oxide carrier material which has a particle diameter  of  from  1 to 1,000 um,  in  particular  from  10  to 400 um, a pore volume  of  from 0.3 to 3, in particular from 1 to 2.5, cm/g  and  a  surface  area  of  from 100  to 1,000, in particular from 200 to 400, m2/g, is  of the formula  SiO2.a  Al2O3,  where  a  is  from  0  to  2,  in  particu lar  from  0  to  0.5, and  has  been  pretreated  with  an  alkyl chlorosilane of  the formula R3mSiCl4-m, where R3  is C1-C10-alkyl,  preferably  C1-C4-alkyl  and  m  s  from  1 to i 3, preferably 2  or  3, in particular 3, in such a  way  that either  (A)  the  carrier  material  and  the  alkylchlorosilane are  combined  once  or  several  times,  in particular  twice, in a liquid inert hydrocarbon, in particular an alkane, with  constant  thorough  mixing  at  from  20'  to  160° C.,  in particular  from  60 to 120° C.,  a  total of  from  1 to  50,  in particular  from  3  to  20,  molar  parts  of  the  alkylchlorosi lane  being  used  per 10  molar  parts  of  the  carrier mate rial, and  a  total  of  from  20  to  200,  in particular  from  40 to 120, molar  parts of  the hydrocarbon  being  used  per 10 molar parts of  the alkylchlorosilane, and the com bined substances are kept at from 20'  to 160  C., in particular  from  60 to 120  C., for  a  total of  from  0.1 to 5, in particular from 0.4 to 2, hours, and  the resulting solid is then  isolated as  the  carrier (III), or  (B)

(IV) titanium tetrachloride and

## (V)  a  phthalic  acid  derivative  of  the  formula

<!-- image -->

CO-Y where  X  and  Y ogether form oxygen or X  and  Y re  65  nium  tetrachloride  at  from  100 to 150° C.,  in  particular t a each  chlorine  or C1-C10-alkoxy,  preferably  C2-C8 alkoxy, in particular chlorine, in such  a  way  that first either (a) (1.2) in a second stage, the solid-phase intermediate obtained from the first stage is subjected to a single stage or multi-stage or  continuous  extraction with tita from 115  to 135° C., for from 0.2 to 5, in particular from  0.4  to  3, hours,  a  total of  from  10  to 1,000,  prefera bly  from  20  to  800,  in  particular  from  40  to  300,  parts  by

45  from  10 to  30'  C.,  from  20  to  300,  preferably  from  30  to SO  weight of  the hydrocarbon  being used per 10  parts by 55  lated  with  removal  of  the  liquid  phase,  with  the  proviso 60  being  used  per 100  molar  parts  of  the magnesium  chlo (1.1.3) in a third substage, the solid-phase reaction product obtained in the second substage and the tita nium tetrachloride (IV) are combined in a liquid inert hydrocarbon, in  particular an alkane,  with constant thorough mixing  at from -20 to 40 C., in particular 200, in particular from 50 to 150, molar parts of  the titanium tetrachloride (IV) being used per 100 molar parts  of  the  alcohol  (II), and  from 10  to 100,  preferably from 10 to 80, in particular from 15 to 60, parts by weight  of  the  carrier  (III), and  the  combined  substances are  kept  at  from  10 to 150 C.,  in  particular  from  30 to 120 C., for from  0.1 to 4, in particular from 0.2 to 2.5, hours, and  the  resulting  solid-phase  intermediate  is iso that  the  phthalic  acid  derivative  (V)  is  introduced  in the course  of  one  or  more  of he  substages  (1.1.1) to (1.1.3), t from 1 to 100,  preferably  from  5  to 60, in  particular  from 10 to 40, molar parts of the phthalic acid derivative ride (I), then

5

weight of  the titanium tetrachloride being  used  per 10 parts  by  weight  of he  solid-phase  intermediate  obtained t from the first stage, and  finally

10

Regarding the novel process, the following may  be stated specifically:

(1.3)  in a third stage,  the solid-phase intermediate obtained in the second stage is extracted with a liquid inert hydrocarbon, in particular an alkane, until the solid contains from  0.01 to 30, preferably from  0.03 to 20, in particular from  0.05 to 10, 7% by  weight  of  free titanium tetrachloride, and  the titanium component  (1) is obtained in this manner.

Provided that the defining feature is taken into ac count, the polymerization process as such can be  car ried out in virtually all  relevant conventional techno  15 logical  embodiments,  for  example  as  a  batchwise,  cyclic or,  in  particular,  continuous  process,  either  as  a  suspen sion  polymerization  processor,  in  particular,  a  dryphase polymerization process. The  stated technological em bodiments, i.e. the technological variants of the poly  20 merization  of  a-monoolefins  by  the  Ziegler-Natta method,  are  well  known  from  the  literature  and  in  prac tice and  therefore require  no  further description.

6

according to the invention; however, phthalic anhy dride  and  the  dialkyl phthalates,  in particular di-n-butyl phthalate, are  also suitable.

The  alkane to be  used  for  the  preparation  of  the tita nium component (1) in stage (1.3) may  likewise be a conventional  one;  it should  advantageously  have  a  rela tively high purity.

The preparation of the titanium component (1)  is simple and can be carried out by the skilled worker without  explanations. Regarding  stages (1.1), (1.2) and (1.3), it is merely  necessary  to  state that  the  isolation of the  particular resulting solid is advantageously carried out by filtration  under suction,  which in stage (1.1) should advantageously  be  followed  by  washing  with  a liquid, inert hydrocarbon until the latter no longer ab sorbs  any  titanium  tetrachloride. It has  been found  that it may  also be  advantageous  if  the  solid-phase reaction product obtained in the second substance (1.1.2.a) is isolated before being  used  in the  third substage (1.1.3), for example  by  evaporation to dryness.

(2) Suitable aluminum components (2) of  the stated formula are the relevant conventional ones  of  this for mula; they  are  sufficiently well known  from the litera ture  and  in practice  to require  no  further  discussion.  An outstanding  member  is, for example,  triethylaluminum.

Regarding  the  composition  of  the  novel  catalysts, the following may  be  stated specifically: without causing damage to the catalyst system or its  35  diethoxyditolyl-, diethoxydi(ethylphenyl)-  and  diethox 30 (3) The silane component (3) which completes the catalyst system is, in particular, a  trialkoxy(alkyl)aryl or dialkoxydi(alkyl)arylsilane  of the stated  formula. Outstanding members are triethoxytolyl-, triethoxy(ethylphenyl)-,  dimethoxyditolyl-  and  dimethoxydi(ethyl phenyl)silane;  other  examples  are  trimethoxytolyl-, trimethoxy(ethylpheny)-  and  trimethoxyphenylsilane, triethoxyphenylsilane, dimethoxydiphenylsilane,  and ydiphenylsilane.

For  the  sake  of ompleteness,  it may  be  stated  that,  in c the novel process, it is also possible to regulate the  25 molecular  weights  of  the  polymers  by  the  relevant  con ventional measures, for example using regulators such as, in particular, hydrogen.

(1) The  liquid inert hydrocarbon to be used for the preparation  of  the  titanium  component  may  be  a  hydro carbon  of  the  type  usually  combined  with  titanium  com ponents for catalyst systems of  the Ziegler-Natta type titanium component. Examples of suitable hydrocar bons are pentanes, hexanes, heptanes,  gasolines and cyclohexane.

The  finely  divided  magnesium  chloride  (I)  likewise  to be  used may  be  a relevant conventional one. It should be essentially anhydrous, i.e.  its water content should not  exceed 1%  by  weight  of  the  total amount  of  magne sium chloride.

The  alkanois  (II) to  be  used  for  the  preparation  of he t titanium component  (1) may  be  conventional  ones;  they  45 should advantageously have relatively high purities. Examples of suitable alkanols are ethanol,  n-propyl alcohol,  isopropyl  alcohol,  n-butyl  alcohol,  isobutyl alcohol  and  tert-butyl  alcohol,  n-butanol  being  particu larly suitable.

The novel process permits homo-  and copolymers, for example of  the binary or ternary type, including block copolymers, of  propene with minor  amounts of other C2-C12-a-monoolefins to be prepared in an ad vantageous  manner,  particularly  suitable a-monoolefins as  comonomers  be  polymerized  being  ethene,  but-1-ene, 4-methylpent-1-ene  and  hex-1-ene; other  suitable exam ples are n-oct-1-ene, n-dec-1-ene.  and n-dodec-1-ene.

## EXAMPLE  1.

## Preparation of  the titanium component  (1)

50

The carrier (III) furthermore to be used generally contains, as a base material, an aluminosilicate or, in particular, silica; it is important  that  it has  the  required properties; it has  been  found  that the relevant conven tional  commercial carrier  materials  which meet the  55 stated  specification  are  suitable. Alkylchlorosilanes  suit able  for  the  preparation  of  the  carrier  are  monoalkyltri chlorosilanes, dialkyldichlorosilanes and  trialkyl  mono chlorosilanes, trialkylmonochlorosilanes  being  particu larly  suitable  and  trimethylchlorosilane  being  preferred. The  titanium tetrachloride (IV) likewise to be  used for  the  preparation  of the  titanium  component (1) should  be  one  which  is conventionally used  in Ziegler Natta catalyst systems. Furthermore,  the  phthalic  acid  derivative  (V)  defined  65  parts, i.e. a  total of  100  molar  parts,  of  the  hydrocarbon above can be a commercial one; it  should advanta geously  be  very  pure. It has  been  found  that  phthaloyl dichloride is very  particularly suitable for the  purpose (I) finely divided magnesium  chloride, (II) n-butanol, (III) a  carrier consisting of  a  finely divided, porous, inorganic oxide carrier material which has a particle diameter of  from  20 to 45 um,  a  pore volume  of 1.75 cm/g  and  a  surface  area  of  320  m2/g,  is of  the  formula SiO2 and has been pretreated with trimethylchlorosi lane in such a way that the carrier material and the alkylchlorosilane  are  combined  twice  in n-heptane  with constant  through mixing  by  means  of  stirring at 65  C., in each case 4.2 molar parts, i.e.  a total of 8.4 molar parts, of  the  alkylchlorosilane  being  used per 10 molar parts of  the  carrier material, and  in  each  case  50  molar being used per 10 molar  parts of  the alkylchlorosilane, and the combined  substances are kept  in each case for 0.5 hour, i.e. for a total of 1  hour, at 85  C., and the

The  process  is carried out  as  follows: first (1.1) in a first  stage, a solid-phase intermediate is prepared from

7

resulting solid is then isolated by  filtration and  washed with n-heptane to give the  carrier (III),

(IV) titanium tetrachloride and

(1.1.1.a)  in  a  first  substage,  the  magnesium  chloride  (I) and the n-butanol (II) are combined  in n-heptane with constant  thorough  mixing  by  means  of  stirring at from 40' to 50° C., 90  parts  by  weight  of  the  n-heptane  being used  per 10  parts  by  weight  of  the  magnesium  chloride (I) and  60  molar  parts of  the n-butanol (II) being  used  10 per 10 molar parts of  the magnesium  chloride (I), and the  combined  substances  are  kept  at  the  boiling  point  of the n-heptane  (about  98  C.)  for  0.5 hour,  after which 5

8

The  productivity of  the catalyst component (1), the heptane-soluble fraction (as a measure of the isotac ticity) and  the  particle  size distribution of  the resulting polymer  are  summarized  in the  Table  below.

## EXAMPLE  2

## Preparation of  the  titanium component  (1)

The  process is carried out  as follows: first (1.1)  in  a first  stage,  a solid-phase intermediate is

(1.1.2.a)  in  a  second  substage,  the  carrier  (III)  is intro duced  into the reaction mixture  resulting  from  the first  15 substage with constant thorough mixing by means of stirring  at from  65  to  75° C.,  40  parts  by  weight  of  the carrier (III) being used per 10 parts by  weight  of  the magnesium  chloride  (I), and  the  entire  mixture  is  left  for rated to dryness under  reduced  pressure, thereafter

10 minutes at the stated temperature and then evapo  20  alkylchlorosilane  are  combined  with  constant  thorough with n-heptane to give  the carrier (III), prepared from (I) finely divided magnesium  chloride, (II) n-butanol, (III) a  carrier consisting of  a  finely divided, porous, inorganic oxide carrier material which has a particle diameter of  from 20 to 45 um,  a  pore volume  of  1.75 cm/g  and  a  surface  area  of  320  m2/g,  is of  the  formula SiO2 and has been pretreated with trimethylchlorosi lane in such a way  that the carrier material and the mixing  by  means  of  stirring  at  57  C., 24  molar  parts  of the alkylchlorosilane being used per 10 molar parts of the carrier material, and the combined substances are kept at the stated temperature for 1  hour, after which the resulting solid is isolated by filtration and washed

(IV) titanium tetrachloride and

(1.1.1.b) in a  first substage, the magnesium chloride (I) and the n-butanol (II) are combined with constant thorough  mixing  by  means  of  stirring  at from  25 to  30 C.,  200  molar  parts  of  the  n-butanol (II) being  used  per 10 molar parts of  the magnesium  chloride (I), and the combined substances are kept at 118° C. for 0.5 hour, after which

(1.1.3) in a third substage, the solid-phase reaction product obtained in the second substage and the tita nium chloride (IV) are combined in n-heptane with constant  thorough  mixing  by  means  of  stirring  at  25 C.,  25 120  molar  parts  of  the  titanium  tetrachloride  (IV)  being used per 100 molar  parts of  the n-butanol (II) and 20 parts  by  weight  of he  n-heptane  being  used  per  10  parts t by  weight  of  the  carrier  (III), after  which  the  phthaloyl dichloride (V) is  introduced, 27 molar parts of the  30 phthaloyl  dichloride  (V)  being  used  per  100  molar  parts of  the  magnesium  chloride  (I), the  combined  substances are  kept  at 100° C.  for  0.25  hour  while  stirring, and  the resulting solid-phase intermediate is isolated by filtra tion under suction with removal of the liquid phase,  35 then

45

(1.3) in a third stage, the solid-phase intermediate obtained  in  the  second  stage  is extracted with  n-heptane until the  solid  contains  3.8%  by  weight  of  free titanium tetrachloride, and the titanium component (1) is  ob tained in this manner.

## (V)  phthaloyl dichloride, in such  a  way  that first

(1.2) in a  second stage, the solid-phase intermediate obtained in the first stage is subjected to a two-phase extraction with  titanium tetrachloride  at 125° C.  for  0.5 hour  in each  stage, in each case  70  parts  by  weight,  i.e. a  total  of  140  parts  by  weight,  of  the  titanium  tetrachlo ride  being  used  per 10  parts  by  weight  of he  solid-phase t intermediate obtained from  the first stage, after which the resulting  solid-phase  intermediate  is  isolated  by means  of  filtration, and  finally

## Polymerization and  finally  0.18 millimole, calculated  as  titanium, of  the  60  tion under suction with removal of  the liquid phase, 50 (1.1.3) in a  third substage, the solid-phase  intermedi ate obtained in the second substage and the titanium tetrachloride  (IV)  are  combined  in n-heptane  with  con stant  thorough  mixing  by  means  of tirring  at  25 C., 140 s molar parts of the titanium tetrachloride (IV) being used per 100 molar parts of  the n-butanol (II), and 50 parts  by  weight  of  the  n-heptane  being  used  per  10  parts by  weight  of  the  carrier  (III), the  combined  substances are kept  at 100° C. for 0.5 hour  while  stirring, and  the resulting solid-phase intermediate is isolated by filtra then

- (1.1.2.b) in a  second substage, the phthaloyl dichlo ride
- (V)  is  first  introduced  into  the  reaction  mixture  result ing  from  the  first substage  with  constant  thorough mix ing  by  means  of  stirring  at from  75  to  80  C., 30  molar parts  of  the  phthaloyl  dichloride  (V)  being  used  per  100 molar  parts  of  the  magnesium  chloride  (I), and  then  the carrier (III) is introduced, 40 parts by weight of the carrier (III) being used per 10  parts by  weight of  the magnesium  chloride  (I), and  the  entire  mixture  is left for 10 minutes at the stated temperature and then evapo rated to dryness  under  reduced  pressure with recovery of  a  solid-phase reaction  product, thereafter

A steel  autoclave having a volume of 10 l  and equipped  with  a  stirrer is charged  with  50  g  of  polypro pene  powder,  20  millimoles  of  triethylaluminum  (in the 55 form  of  a  one  molar  solution  in  n-heptane)  as  the  alumi num  component  (2), 2  millimoles  of  triethoxy-p-tolylsi lane  (in  the  form  of    one  molar  solution  in  n-heptane)  as a the silane component  (3), 5  liters (S.T.P.) of  hydrogen titanium component  (1) described  above,  at 30° C.  The reactor  temperature  is  brought  to  70° C.  in  the  course  of 10  minutes  and  the  reactor  pressure  is brought  to  28  bar in this time  by  forcing  in gaseous  propene.

The actual polymerization is carried out with con  65  hour  in each  stage, in each  case  70  parts  by  weight,  i.e. stant stirring at 70°  C. and under 28 bar for 2 hours, monomer  consumed  being replaced continuously with fresh monomer. (1.2) in a  second stage, the solid-phase intermediate obtained from  the  first stage  is subjected to a  two-stage extraction with  titanium tetrachloride  at 125  C.  for  0.5 a  total of  140  parts  by  weight,  of  the  titanium  tetrachlo ride  being  used  per  10  parts  by  weight  of he  solid-phase t intermediate  obtained in the first stage, after  which  the

(V)  phthaloyl dichloride, in such  a  way  that first

9

resulting solid-phase intermediate is isolated by filtra tion, and  finally

Polymerization

(1.3)  in a third stage,  the solid-phase intermediate obtained  in the  second  stage  is  extracted  with  n-heptane until the  solid  contains  4.2%  by  weight  of  free titanium  5 tetrachloride, and the titanium component (1) is  ob tained in this manner.

This is carried out as described in Example 1; the polymerization  result  obtained  here  is  likewise  shown  in  10 the  Table  below.

## COMPARATIVE  EXPERIMENT

Preparation of  the  titanium component

The  procedure  described in Example 1 of  U.S. Pat.  15 No.  4,467,044  is followed  using,  as  a  carrier,  the  carrier material  defined  in Example 1  of  the  present  invention. The titanium component obtained contains 4.3% by weight  of  titanium.

## Polymerization

20

A steel  autoclave  having a  volume of 10  l  and equipped  with  a  stirrer  is charged  with  50  g f  olypro o p pene  powder,  24  millinoles  of  triethylaluminum  (in the form  of  a  one  molar  solution  in n-heptane)  as  the  alumi  25 num  component, 1.08 g  of  methyl p-toluate, 60 mg  of the titanium component  and 5 liters (S.T.P.) of  hydro gen at 30°  C. The  further procedure is carried out as described in Example 1 of  the  present  invention.

The polymerization  result  obtained is  once again  30 shown  in the  Table  below.

As  shown  in the  Table,  the  catalyst component  from the Comparative Experiment  has a  substantially lower productivity  and  stereospecificity  than  the  catalyst components  from  the Examples  according  to  the  inven  35 tion.  Furthermore, the  particle size  distribution  has shifted to  a range  of  undesirably large  particles.

10

that  the  atomic  ratio of  titanium  from  the  titanium  com ponent  (1) to  aluminum  from  the  aluminum  component (2) is from 1:10 to 1:800, and the molar ratio of  alumi num component (2) to silane component (3) is from 1:0.03 to 1:0.8, wherein  the  titanium component

- (1)  used is  one which is  obtained by a method in which first
- (1.1)  in  a first  stage, a solid-phase intermediate is prepared  from
- (I) finely divided magnesium  chloride,
- (II) a  C1-C3-alkanol,

(III) a  carrier consisting of  a  finely divided, porous, inorganic  oxide  carrier  material which  has  a  parti cle diameter  of  from 1 to 1,000 um,  a  pore  volume of  from  0.3 to 3  cm/g nd  a surface  area of  from a 100 to 1,000 m2/g,  is of  the  formula  SiO2.a  Al2O3, where  a  is  from  0  to  2,  and  has  been  pretreated  with an alkylchlorosilane of  the formula RSiCl4-m, where R is C1-C10-alkyl and m  is from 1  to 3, in such a  way  that either (A) the carrier  material  and the alkylchlorosilane are combined once or several times, in a liquid inert hydrocarbon with constant thorough mixing at from 20 to 160  C., a  total of  from 1  to 50 molar parts of the alkylchlorosilane being used per  10 molar  parts of  the carrier material, and a total of from 20 to 200 molar parts of the hydrocarbon being  used  per 10  molar  parts of  the  alkylchlorosi lane,  and  the  combined  substances  are  kept  at  from 20 to 160 C.,  for  a  total  of  rom  0.1 to  5  hours,  and f the resulting solid is then isolated as the carrier (III),

## or  (B)

the carrier  material and the alkylchlorosilane are combined with constant thorough mixing  at from 20  to 140  C., from 5 to 50 molar parts of the

|             | Productivity        | Heptane-soluble fractions   | Particle size distribution (mm)   | Particle size distribution (mm)   | Particle size distribution (mm)   | Particle size distribution (mm)   | Particle size distribution (mm)   |
|-------------|---------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
|             | (g of PP/g of cat.) | (% by weight)               | (0.25                             | 0.25-0.5                          | 0.5-1                             | 1-2                               | >2                                |
| Example 1   | 6,810               | 2.8                         | 5.4                               | 16.                               | 69.5                              | 8.7                               | 0.3                               |
| Example 2   | 7,300               | 2.3                         | 1.7                               | 6.3                               | 73.2                              | 18.4                              | 0.4                               |
| Comparative | 3,600               | 22.4                        | 2.2                               | 4.7                               | 18.2                              | 66.4                              | 8.5                               |
| Experiment  |                     |                             |                                   |                                   |                                   |                                   |                                   |

We  claim:

- 1. A rocess  for  the  preparation  of  homopolymers  of p propene  and  copolymers  of  propene  with  minor amounts  of  other  C2-C12-a-monoolefins  by  polymeriza tion of  the monomer  or monomers  at from  20' to 160 C. and  under  from 1 to 100 bar using a Ziegler-Natta catalyst system  consisting of
- (1) a titanium component which contains titanium, magnesium,  chlorine  and  a  benzenecarboxylic  acid derivative on  a  carrier,

50

55

- (2) an  aluminum  component  of  the formula

AllR3,

60

where  R  is  alkyl  of ot  more han  8  carbon  atoms,  and n t (3) a  silane component  of  the  formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R is an  aryl, alkylaryl or  alkyl radical of  not more  than  16  carbon  atoms, R2  is alkyl of  not  more  than 15 carbon  atoms  and  n  is from  0  to  3, with  the  provisos alkylchlorosilane  being  used  per 10  molar  parts of the carrier material, and  the combined substances are kept at a temperature in the stated range for from  0.1 to 5 hours, and  the resulting solid is then isolated as  the carrier (III),

- (V)  a  phthalic acid derivative  of  the formula
- (IV)  titanium tetrachloride and

<!-- image -->

CO-Y

<!-- image -->

CO-Y

65

11

where  X nd  Y  together form  oxygen  or  X nd  Y a a are each  chlorine or  C1-C10-alkoxy,  in such  a  way that first either (a)

5

O

15

- (1.1.1.a)  in  a  first  substage,  the  magnesium  chloride  (I) and the alkanol (II) are combined  in a  liquid inert hydrocarbon with  constant thorough mixing at from  0 to 140°C., from  20  to 1,000  parts  by  weight of the hydrocarbon being used per 10 parts by weight  of  the  magnesium  chloride (I) and  from 10 to 80  molar  parts  of  the  alkanol  (II) being  used  per 10 molar  parts of  the magnesium  chloride (I), and the combined substances are kept at from 20  to 140  C., for from  0.1 to 6  hours,  after which
- (1.1.2.a)  in  a  second  substage,  the  carrier  (III)  is intro duced  into the reaction mixture resulting  from  the first substage, with constant thorough mixing at from  0 to 140  C., from  20  to 100  parts  by  weight of the carrier (III) being used per  10 parts by  20 weight  of  the  magnesium  chloride (I),

or  (b)

25

30

- (1.1.1.b) in a first substage, the magnesium chloride (I) and  the  alkanol  (II) are  combined  with  constant thorough  mixing  at from  0 to 140 C., from 100  to 1,000  molar  parts  of  the  alkanol (II) being  used  per 10 molar  parts of  the  magnesium  chloride (I), and the combined substances are kept at from 20  to 140  C. for from  0.1 to 6  hours, after which
- (1.1.2.b)  in  a  second  substage,  the  carrier  (III) is intro duced  into the reaction mixture resulting  from  the first  substage with constant thorough mixing at from 0 to 140 C., from  20  to 100  parts  by  weight of the carrier (III)  being used per  10 parts by 35 weight  of  the  magnesium  chloride (I), and  the  en

40

45

50

55

60

65

12

tire  mixture  is  evaporated  to  dryness  with  recovery of  a  solid-phase reaction product, and thereafter

- (1.1.3) in a third substage, the solid-phase reaction product obtained in the second substage and the titanium tetrachloride  (IV)  are  combined  in  a  liquid inert hydrocarbon with constant thorough mixing at  from -20 to 40° C., from  20  to 300  molar  parts of  the  titanium tetrachloride
- (IV) being used per 100 molar parts of  the alcohol (II),  and from 10 to  100 parts by weight of the hydrocarbon  being  used  per 10  parts  by  weight  of the carrier (III), and the combined  substances are kept  at  from 10  to 150  C., for  from  0.1 to 4  hours, and the resulting solid-phase intermediate is  iso lated with removal of  the liquid phase, with the proviso that the phthalic  acid derivative  (V) is introduced in the course of one or more of the substages (1.1.1) to (1.1.3),  from  1  to  100 molar parts  of  the  phthalic  acid  derivative  being  used  per 100  molar  parts  of  the  magnesium  chloride  (I), then
- (1.3)  in  a third stage,  the solid-phase intermediate obtained in the second stage is extracted with a liquid inert hydrocarbon until the solid contains from  0.01 to 30%  by  weight  of  free  titanium tetra chloride, and the titanium component (1)  is  ob tained in this manner.
- (1.2) in a  second stage, the solid-phase intermediate obtained from the first stage is subjected to a sin glestage or multi-stage or continuous extraction with titanium tetrachloride  at  from 100 to 150  C., for from  0.2 to 5 hours,  a  total of  from 10  to 1,000 parts  by  weight  of  the  titanium tetrachloride  being used  per  10  parts  by  weight  of he  solid-phase  inter t mediate obtained from the first stage, and  finally

:

k

s

2