## United States Patent (19) Nowlin et al.

## 54 CATALYST  COMPOSITION  FOR POLYMERZNG  ALPHA-OLEFIN POLYMERS  OF  NARROW  MOLECULAR WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION

- 75 Inventors:

Thomas E. Nowlin,  Somerset; Kenneth G.  Schurzky, Bridgewater, both of  N.J.

- 73) Assignee:

Mobil Oil Corporation, New  York, N.Y.

- (21) Appl. No.:  143,989
- 22) Filed:

Jan. 14, 1988

- 51

Int. Cl." ................................................  CO8F  /64 4

- (52)

U.S. C.  ....................................  502/107:  502/110; 502/111; 502/115

- (58)

Field of  Search ...............  502/110, 111, 115, 125, 502/107

## 56) References Cited

## U.S. PATENT  DOCUMENTS

| 17,285    | 2/1887   | Lo et al.                               |           |
|-----------|----------|-----------------------------------------|-----------|
| 37,680    | 4/1887   | . Allen et al. .                        |           |
| 143,987   | /1888    | Nowlin                                  |           |
| 2,905,645 | 9/1959   | . Anderson et al. ..................    | 252A29    |
| 2,912,419 | 1/1959   | Peters et al. .......... .              | 260/93.7  |
| 2,936,291 | 5/1960   | Peters et al. .. ...                    | 252A31    |
| 3,052,660 | 9/1962   | Osgan ................................. | 260/88.2  |
| 3,135,809 | 6/1964   | Bosmajian.                              | 502/103 X |
| 3,574,138 | 4/1971   | Ziegler et al. ...                      | 502/117   |
| 3,787,384 | 1/1974   | Stevens et al. .....................    | 260/94.9  |

11 Patent Number:

4,849,389

45 Date of Patent:

Jul. 18, 1989

| 4,148,754   | 4/1979   | Strobel et al. .......................   | 252/.429   |
|-------------|----------|------------------------------------------|------------|
| 4,296,223   | 10/1981  | Berger ........                          | 502/134 X  |
| 4,378,304   | 3/1983   | Dombro ..............................    | 502/111    |
| 4,458,058   | 7/1984   | Dombro ............. ...                 | 526/129    |
| 4,481,301   | 11/1984. | Nowin et al. ..... .                     | 502/04     |
| 4,558,024   | 12/1985  | Best ....................                | 502/115    |
| 4,558,025   | 12/1985  | Best ....                                | 502/115    |
| 4,579,835   | 4/1986   | Best ....                                | SO2/120    |
| 4,668,650   | 5/1987   | Lo et al. ..... ...                      | 502/111    |
| 4,732,882   | 3/1988   | Allen et al. .....................       | 502/115 X  |

Primary Examiner-Patrick P. Garvin

Attorney, Agent, or Firm-Alexander  J. McKillop; Charles  J. Speciale; Stanislaus Aksman

## 57 ABSTRACT

A  supported alpha-olefin polymerization catalyst com position  is  synthesized  by  reacting  (1)  a  slurry  of  a  solid catalyst  carrier  in  a  non-polar  solvent,  e.g., hexane,  with a  dialkyl organomagnesium  composition; (2) contacting the  slurry of  step (1) with  a  hydroxyl group-containing compound,  e.g., an  alcohol; (3) contacting  the  slurry of step  (2)  with  at  least  one  transition metal  compound;  (4) removing  the  non-polar  solvent  to  obtain  a  dry-flowing powder;  and, (5) activating the  powder  with trimethyl aluminum. The resulting catalyst composition is  ex tremely  active  in  polymerizing  C2-C10  alpha-olefins  and exhibits very good  higher (C3-C10)  alpha-olefin incor poration properties.

## 56  Claims,  4  Drawing  Sheets

<!-- image -->

MINO?OOld

MFR vs  -HEXENE CONTENT  .

F.  G. 2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

N

FIG.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| CATALYST   |   AVG, MFR |   DATA PTS. |
|------------|------------|-------------|
| a NVENTIVE |       29.8 |           8 |

F.G.  6

<!-- image -->

1.

## CATALYST  COMPOSITION  FOR POLYMERIZING  ALPHAOLEFN POLYMERS OF  NARROW  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION

## BACKGROUND  OF  THE  INVENTION 1.  Field of  the Invention

The  present invention relates to a method for poly merizing  alpha-olefins,  a  catalyst  for  such  a  polymeriza tion method and a method for producing such a cata lyst.  In particular, the present invention  relates to a catalyst, and  a method  for preparation thereof, which produces linear low density  polyethylene (LLDPE) having  a narrow molecular  weight  distribution, as evi denced by relatively low values of melt flow ratio, (MFR), and low hexane extractables, suitable for film and injection  molding applications. The invention  is also  directed  to  a highly productive polymerization process carried out with the catalyst of  the invention.

2

content, and  then reacting the product with a tetrava lent titanium compound.

10  The  product  of  the synthesis reaction is activated with Dombro, U.S.  Pat.  Nos. 4,378,304 and 4,458,058, disclose an olefin polymerization catalyst composition synthesized by sequentially reacting: (1) a porous Sup port  with  a  Group  IIA  organometallic compound,  e.g., a  dialkylmagnesium;  (2) the  product  of  (1) with  water  or a hydrocarbyl alcohol, e.g., methanol; (3) the product of  (2)  with  a  transition  metal  compound  or  compounds. a  co-catalyst  which  is a  Group  IA, IIa, IIIA  and/or  IIB organometallic compound, including hydrogen. Suit able co-catalysts are n-butylithium, diethylmagnesium, trisobutylaluminum and diethylaluminum chloride.

## 2. Description of  the Prior Art

Karol et al.,  U.S. Pat. No.  4,302,566, describe a pro cess for  producing  linear  low  density  polyethylene  pol ymers  in a  gas  phase, fluid bed  reactor. Graff,  U.S.  Pat.  No.  4,173,547,  Stevens  et  al., U.S.  Pat. No.  3,787,384,  Strobel  et  al, U.S.  Pat.  No.  4,148,754,  and Ziegler, deceased, et al, U.S. Pat. No.  4,063,009, each describe various polymerization processes suitable for producing  forms  of  polyethylene  other  than  linear low density polyethylene, per  se. Graff, U.S. Pat. No.  4,173,547, describes  a  supported catalyst obtained by treating a support with both an organoaluminum compound  and  an organomagnesium compound  followed  by  contacting this treated support with a  tetravalent  titanium compound. Stevens  et  al.,  U.S. Pat. No.  3,787,384, and  Strobel et al, U.S. Pat. No.  4,148,754, describe  a  catalyst  prepared by  first reacting  a  support  (e.g., silica containing reac tive hydroxyl groups) with an  organomagnesium  com pound (e.g., a Grignard reagent) and then combining this reacted support with a tetravalent titanium com pound. According to the teachings of both of these patents, no unreacted organomagnesium compound is present  when  the reacted support  is contacted  with the 50  crease  with  increased  concentration  of  the  catalyst  acti tetravalent titanium compound. halide)  with  a  tetravalent  titanium  compound.  The  reac  55  vator concentration without  substantially affecting the 25 30  lar weight  distribution of  the  resins. Resins  having  rela 35  produce injection-molded products more  likely to un 40  ratio is believed to be an indication of the molecular 45  tribution.  Additionally,  LLDPE resins  having such When the LLDPE  resins are fabricated into injec tion-molded products, it  is  imperative to assure that such  products  are  not  susceptible to warping  or  shrink ing.  As  is known  to  those  skilled  in  the  art,  the  degree  of warping  or  shrinking  can  be  predicted  from  the  molecu tively narrow molecular weight distribution produce injection-molded products exhibiting a minimum amount of warping or shrinkage. Conversely, resins having relatively broad molecular weight distribution dergo  warping  or  shrinkage.  One  of  the  measures  of  the molecular weight distribution of  the resin is melt flow ratio (MFR),  the ratio of  high melt  flow  index  (HLMI or  I21)  to  melt  index  (I2)  for  a  given  resin.  The  melt  flow weight  distribution of  the  polymer,  the  higher  the  MFR value, the broader the molecular weight distribution. Resins  having  relatively  low  MFR  alues, e.g., of  about v 20  to 50, have  relatively narrow  molecular  weight  dis relatively  low MFR  values  produce films  of better strength properties than resins with high MFR alues. v Many catalyst systems exhibit a tendency to produce resins whose MFR  values, although initially low, in vator, also known  as a  co-catalyst, such  as various  alu minum alkyls.  Under certain  circumstances, e.g.,  to improve catalyst productivity and/or comonomer in corporation, it is desirable to increase the catalyst  acti resin MFR.

Linear low density polyethylene polymers possess properties which  distinguish them  from other  polyeth ylene polymers, such as homopolymers of polyethyl ene. Certain  of  these  properties  are  described  in Ander son et  al., U.S. Pat. No.  4,076,698.

15 20  pound, e.g., a titanium compound (the U.S. Pat. No. Best, U.S. Pat. Nos.  4,558,024, 4,558,025 and 4,579,835, disclose olefin polymerization catalyst com positions  prepared  by  reacting  together  a  porous  partic ulate  material, an organic magnesium compound, an oxygen-containing compound, a transition metal com 4,558,024) or  a  vanadium  compound  (the U.S. Pat. No. 4,579,835),  and  a  co-catalyst. Some  of  the  catalyst  com positions  of  Best  also  include  an  acyl  halide  (e.g., see  the U.S. Pat. No.  4,579,835  and  the  U.S.  Pat  No.  4,558,025).

Ziegler, deceased, et al, U.S. Pat. No.  4,063,009, de scribe a catalyst which is the reaction product of  an organomagnesium compound  (e.g., an  alkylmagnesium tion of  the  organomagnesium  compound  with  the  tetra Valent  titanium  compound  takes  place  in the  absence  of a support material.

Nowlin  et  al, U.S. Pat. No.  4,481,301, disclose  a  sup tion prepared by reacting a support containing OH groups with a stoichiometric excess of  an  organomag nesium composition, with respect to the OH  groups

A  vanadium-containing  catalyst, used  in conjunction with triisobutylaluminum as a co-catalyst, is disclosed 60  ane extractables which is a measure of  the amount of by  W.L. Carrick et al in  Journal  of  American Chemical Society, Volume  82, page 1502 (1960) and Volume  83, page  2654  (1961). ported alpah-olefin polymerization catalyst composi 65  amounts  of  allowable  hexane  extractables  in  such  plastic Another  important  property  of  LLDPE  resins, man ufactured into products coming  into contact with arti cles  subject  to FDA egulations, e.g., foodstuffs, is hex r low  molecular  weight  and/or  highly  branched  polymer fractions capable of  being  extracted from the manufac tured  products, e.g., plastic food  containers, by  hexane extraction. The  FDA  imposed  strict regulations on  the products.

Thus, Allen et al,  European Patent Office (EPO) Application  No.  87300536.1,  published  on  Aug.  5, 1987,

3

as publication  No. 0231102,  disclose  an alpha-olefin polymerization  catalyst  composition  activated  with trimethylaluminum which produces polymers having relatively low  values  of  MRF nd  low  hexane  extracta a bles. However, the productivity of  the polymerization  5 process  carried out with such a  catalyst composition is lower  than  that  of  the  process  carried  out  with  the  same catalyst compositions activated with more  commonly used activators, such as triethylaluminum and triso butylaluminum.

4.

FIG. 4  is a graphical representation of  the effect of the catalyst precursor drying temperature and catalyst activator on the  catalyst productivity.

FIG.  5  is a  graphical  representation  of  the  correlation between MFR  and triethylaluminum activator content in the  inventive  and  comparative  catalyst compositions.

O  tions. FIG.  6  is a  graphical representation  of  the  correlation between MFR  and trimethylaluminum activator con tent  in the  inventive and  comparative  catalyst composi

Accordingly, it  is  important to provide a catalyst composition capable of  producing a alpha-olefin poly mers  having relatively narrow  molecular  weight  distri bution (low MFR  values) which remains substantially constant with varying amounts of  the co-catalyst, and which catalyst composition has high activity.

## DETAILED  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE INVENTION

It is therefore a  primary  object of  the  present inven tion  to  provide  a  high  activity  catalyst  for  the  polymeri zation of  alpha-olefins yielding  products of  a relatively 20  previously-known  catalyst  compositions,  e.g.,  those narrow molecular weight distribution which is main tained substantially constant with varying amounts of the co-catalyst concentration. 15  compositions of  this invention are linear polyethylenes The  polymers  prepared  in the  presence  of  the  catalyst which  are  homopolymers  of  ethylene or  copolymers  of ethylene  and  higher  alpha-olefins. The  polymers  exhibit relatively low  values  of  melt  flow  ratio (MFR),  as com pared to similar polymers prepared in the presence of disclosed by Nowlin et al,  U.S.  Pat.  No. 4,481,301. Thus,  the  polymers  prepared  with  the  catalyst  composi tions of this invention are especially suitable for the production of  films and  injection molding  applications.

It is another object of  the present invention to pro vide a high activity catalyst composition which pro- 25 duces  alpha-olefin polymers  having relatively low  hex ane extractables.

Catalysts produced according to the present inven tion  are described below in  terms of the manner in which they are made.

It is an additional object of  the present invention to provide  a  catalytic process for polymerizing  alpha-ole fins which yields linear low  density polyethylene of  a 30 relatively narrow  molecular  weight  distribution at high productivity rates.

## CATALYST  SYNTHESIS

## SUMMARY  OF  THE  INVENTION

A Supported  alpha-olefin  polymerization  catalyst composition of  this invention  is prepared  in a  multi-step process. In the first step, a mixture of  a solid, porous carrier  and  a  non-polar  solvent  is contacted  with  at  least one organomagnesium composition of  the formula

40

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R  and R are the same  or  different CA-C12  alkyl groups, n  and n are each 0,  1  and 2, providing that m--n  equals the valence of  Mg.  Subsequently, the  mix ture of  the  first step  is contacted  with  at least one  com pound  of  formula (II), R2-OH,  where R2  is a C1-C10 alkyl or  a  C1-C10  halogenated  alkyl. The  resulting mix ture  is then  contacted with  at  least one  transition metal compound  soluble in the non-polar  solvent. The  prod uct  is dried  and  it is activated catalyst composition has very high productivity in the polymerization of  alpha olefins, very effective higher comonomer  (i.e., C3-C10 alpha-olefin) incorporation properties and it produces 55 polymers having relatively narrow molecular weight distribution and  low  hexane  extractables.

35  silicon and/or  aluminum.  The  carrier  materials  are  used 45  about  600  C.  When  the  carrier  is silica, it is heated at a 50  tion of  this invention. The carrier  materials are usually inorganic,  solid, particulate  porous  materials  which  are  inert  to  the  other components  of  the  catalyst  composition  and  to  the  other active  components  of  the  reaction  system.  These  carrier materials include such inorganic materials as oxides of in the  form  of  dry  powders  having  an  average particle size of  from  about 1  micron  to about  250  microns,  pref erably  from  about  10  microns  to  about 150  microns.  The carrier  materials  are  also  porous  and  have  a  surface  area of  at  least  about  3  square  meters  per  gram,  and  prefera bly  at  least  about  50  square  meters  per  gram.  The arrier c material should be  dry, that is, free of  absorbed water. Drying  of  the carrier material can  be  effected by  heat ing at about 100  to about 1000  C. and preferably at temperature  of  at least  200 C.,  preferably  at  about  200 to about  850  C., and most  preferably at about 600  C. The carrier material  must have at least some active hydroxyl  (OH)  groups  to  produce  the  catalyst composi

## BRIEF  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FIGURES

FIG.  1  is a  graphical  representation  of  productivity  of 60 various catalysts as a function of  alcohols used in the synthesis.

FIG.  2  is  a  graphical  representation  of  melt  flow  ratio (MFR) as a function of 1-hexane content and catalyst activator.

In  the  most  preferred  embodiment,  the  carrier  is silica which, prior to the  use thereof  in the  first catalyst syn thesis step, has  been dehydrated by fluidizing with ni trogen and  heating  at about  600  C.  for  about 16  hours to achieve a surface hydroxyl concentration of  about 0.7 mmols/gm.  The  silica  of  the  most  preferred  embodi ment is a high surface area, amorphous  silica (surface area=300  m2/gm;  pore  volume  of  1.65 cm/gm),  and  it is material marketed under  the tradenames of  Davison 952  or Davison 955  by  the Davison Chemical Division of  W.R.  Grace  and Company.  The  silica is in the form of  spherical  particles,  e.g., as  obtained  by  a  spray-drying process.

65

FIG. 3 is a graphical representation of the depen dency  of  polymer  MFR n  the  alcohol used  in the  cata o lyst synthesis and  catalyst activator.

The  carrier material is slurried in a  non-polar  solvent and the resulting slurry is contacted with at least one organomagnesium composition having the empirical formula (I).  The slurry of  the carrier material in the solvent is prepared  by  introducing the carrier material

5

into the solvent, preferably while  stirring, and heating the mixture is about 25  to about 100  C., preferably about 40  to about  60°  C.  The  slurry is then contacted with the aforementioned organomagnesium composi tion, while the heating is continued at the aforemen tioned temperature.

6

nesium  composition  added  to  the  slurry is such  that the molar ratio of  Mg  to the hydroxyl  groups  (OH)  on  the solid carrier is about 1:1 to about  6:1, preferably about 2:1 to about 4:1, more  preferably about 2.5:1 to about 3.5:1 and  most  preferably  about  3:1, depending  upon  the temperature at which the carrier material was dried. The organomagnesium composition  dissolves  in  the non-polar solvent to form  a  solution.

O  ganomagnesium  composition which  is in excess of  that It is also possible to add such an amount  of  the or which will be  deposited onto the support and then re move, e.g., by  filtration and  washing,  any  excess of  the organomagnesium composition. However,  this alterna tive is less desirable than the most preferred embodi ment  described above.

The  organomagnesium  composition  has  the  empirical formula Rin Mg  R", where R  and R' are the same  or different C4-C12  alkyl groups, preferably C4-C10  alkyl groups,  more preferably  C4-C8 unsubstituted  alkyl groups, and  most  preferably  both R nd R' are n-butyl a groups, and m  and  n  are each 0, 1  or  2, providing  that m-n  is equal to the valence of  Mg.

Suitable non-polar  solvents  are materials  in which  all of  the  reactants  used  herein, i.e., the  organomagnesium  15 composition, the compound of formula (II)  and the transition metal  compounds  are  at least partially  soluble and  which  are  liquid  at  reaction  temperatures. Preferred non-polar solvents are alkanes, such as hexane, n-hep tane, octane, nonane, and  decane,  although  a  variety of  20 other materials including cycloalkanes, such as cyclo hexane, aromatics, such as benzene and ethylbenzene can  be  employed.  The  most  preferred non-polar  solvent is hexane. Prior  to use, the non-polar  solvent  should  be purified, such  as by  percolation through silica gel and  25 /or molecular sieves, to remove traces of  water, oxy gen, polar compounds, and other materials capable of adversely  affecting catalyst activity.

In  the  most  preferred embodiment  of  the  synthesis  of this catalyst it is important  to  add  only  such  an  amount  30 of the  organomagnesium  composition  that  will  be deposited-physically or  chemically--onto  the  support since any  excess of  the organomagnesium  composition in the solution may  react with other synthesis chemi cals, and  precipitate outside  of  the  support.  The  carrier  35 drying temperature affects the number  of  sites on the carrier available for the  organomagnesium composi tion-the  higher the drying temperature the lower  the number of  sites. Thus,  the exact molar ratio of  the or ganomagnesium composition to the hydroxyl groups will vary and must be determined on a case-by-case basis to assure that only so much of the ogranomag nesium composition is added  to the solution as will be deposited onto  the support without leaving  any  excess of  the organomagnesium composition in the solution.  45 Furthermore,  it is believed that  the molar  amout  of  the organomagnesium composition deposited onto  the sup port is greater than the molar  content of  the hydroxyl groups on the support. Thus, the molar ratios given guideline and the  exact amount of the organomag nesium composition in this embodiment must  be con trolled  by  the  functional  limitation discussed  above,  i.e., it must  not  be  greater  than  that  which  can  be  deposited onto  the  support. If  greater  than  the  amount  is added  to  55 the  solvent,  the  excess  may  react  with  the  compound  of formula (II), thereby forming a precipitate outside of the  support  which  is detrimental  in  the  synthesis  of  our catalyst and must  be avoided. The  amount of  the or that deposited onto the support can be determined in any  conventional  manner,  e.g.,  by adding  the  or ganomagnesium  composition  to  the  slurry  of  the  carrier in  the solvent, while stirring the slurry, until the or the  solvent.

After  the  addition of  the  organomagnesium  composi tion to the slurry is completed, the slurry is contacted with at least one  compound  of  the  formula  (II)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R'  is a  C1-C10  alkyl group or a C1-C10  haloge nated  alkyl  group, preferably  R' is  a C1-C10 alkyl group, more  preferably a  C1-C4  normal alkyl group  or a C1-C4 halogenated normal  alkyl group, and most preferably R'  is an  ethyl  group.  Thus,  the  compound  of formula (II) is preferably an  alcohol and most  prefera bly ethanol. The  amount  of  the compound  of  formula (II) used in this synthesis step is sufficient to convert substantially all  of the magnesium alkyl  (Mg-R  or MgR) groups on the carrier  to  magnesium alkoxy (MgO R') groups.  In a preferred embodiment, the amount  of  the  formula  (II) compound  added  is such  that substantially no excess thereof is present in the non polar solvent after substantially all  of the magnesium alkyl groups are converted to the magnesium alkoxy groups on the carrier to prevent the reaction of the formula (II) compound  with the transition metal com pound  outside  of  the  carrier. This  synthesis  step  is con ducted  at about  25  to  about  65° C.,  preferably  at  about 30 to  about  55  C., and  most  preferably  at  about  30  to about  40  C.

below are intended to serve only as an approximate  50 preferred embodiment, the amount of the transition ganomagnesium composition which  is not  greater than 60  the  transition metal compound,  to the  hydroxyl  groups ganomagnesium  composition  is detected  as  a  solution  in  65  catalyst  composition  which  produces  resins  having For example, for the silica carrier heated at about 200  to about 850  C., the amount  of  the organomag After the addition of  the formula (II) compound is completed, the slurry is  contacted with at least one transition  metal  compound soluble in  the non-polar solvent.  This  synthesis  step  is conducted  at  about  25  to about 65°  C., preferably at about 30  to about 55  C., and most preferably at about 30  to about 40° C. In a metal compound  added  is not greater than that which can  be  deposited  onto  the  carrier.  The  exact  molar  ratio of  Mg  to  the  transition metal  and  of  the  transition metal to  the  hydroxyl  groups  of  the  carrier  will  therefore  vary (depending,  e.g., on  the  carrier  drying  temperature)  and must  be  determined on  a  case-by-case basis. For  exam ple, for  the  silica  carrier  heated  at  about  200  to 850 C., the amount of  the transition metal compound is such that  the  molar  ratio  of he  transition metal,  derived  from t of  the  carrier is about 1  to about  2.0, preferably about 1.5 to  about  2.0  and  the  molar  ratio  of Mg  to the  transi tion metal is about 1 to about 3, preferably about 2 to about 3. We  found that these molar ratios produce a relatively low  melt  flow  ratio  (MFR)  values  of  about  20 to  about  35. As  is known  to  those  skilled  in  the  art, such resins can  be  utilized  to produce  high  strength  films  and

7

8

injection molding  products  which  are resistant to  warp ing or  shrinking. Suitable transition metal compounds used herein are compounds  of  metals  of  Groups  IVA,  VA,  VIA r  VIII o of  the Periodic Chart  of  the Elements,  as published by  5 the Fisher Scientific Company, Catalog No. 5-702-10, 1978,  providing  that  such  compounds  are  soluble  in the non-polar  solvents. Non-limiting  examples  of  such  com pounds are titanium and vanadium halides, e.g., tita nium  tetrachloride,  TiCl4,  vanadium  tetrachloride,  10  solid). Thus, the reaction is a  solid-liquid reaction. For VCl4, vanadium oxytrichloride, VOCI3, titanium and vanadium  alkoxides, wherein the alkoxide moiety  has  a branched or  unbranched alkyl radical of  1 to about 20 carbon atoms, preferably 1  to about 6 carbon atoms. The  preferred transition metal compounds  are  titanium  15  side of the solid catalyst support. Such an insoluble compounds,  preferably tetravalent titanium com pounds. The  most  preferred titanium compound  is tita nium  tetrachloride. the  slurry  of  the  carrier  in the  non-polar  solvent.  There fore, all of  the catalysts synthesis chemical ingredients must be soluble in the non-polar solvent used in  the synthesis. The order of addition of the reagents may also  be  important  since  the  catalyst  synthesis procedure is  predicated on the chemical reaction between the chemical ingredients sequentially  added to  the  non polar  solvent  (a liquid) and  the  solid carrier material or a catalyst intermediate supported  by  such a material (a example, the catalyst synthesis procedure must  be  con ducted  in such  a  manner  as to avoid  the reaction of  two or more reagents in the non-polar solvent to form a reaction product  insoluble  in the  non-polar  solvent  out reaction product would  be incapable of  reacting with the carrier or the catalyst intermediate and therefore would  not  be  incorporated  onto  the  solid  support  of  the catalyst composition.

transition metal compound  is completed, the non-polar 25  tion under an atmosphere of  nitrogen, argon or other composition. Lower  solvent removal  temperatures  pro- 30  Purification of  the non-polar solvent employed in the The  catalyst precursors of  the present invention are prepared in the substantial absence of water, oxygen, and  other  catalyst  poisons.  Such  catalyst  poisons  can  be excluded during the catalyst preparation steps by any well  known  methods,  e.g., by  carrying  out  the  prepara inert  gas. An  inert  gas  purge  can  serve  the  dual  purpose of  excluding  external contaminants  during  the  prepara tion  and removing undesirable  reaction  by-products resulting from the preparation of catalyst precursor. catalyst synthesis is also helpful in this regard.

C., preferably at about 45  to about 55°  C. and most 35  lyst and the activator before the introduction thereof The  catalyst may  be activated in situ by adding the TMA  activator  and  catalyst  separately  to  the  polymeri zation medium.  It is also  possible to combined  the  cata into the  polymerization medium,  e.g., for up  to about  2 hours prior to the introduction thereof  into the poly merization  medium at a  temperature of from about -  40 to about 100°  C.

Mixtures of such transition metal compounds may also be used and generally no restrictions are imposed 20 on the transition metal compounds which may  be in cluded. Any transition metal compound that may be used alone may  also be  used in conjunction with other transition metal compounds. After the addition of  the solvent  is slowly  removed,  e.g., by  distillation or  evapo ration. We  found that the temperature at which the non-polar solvent is removed from the synthesis mix ture affects the productivity of the resulting catalyst duce catalyst  compositions  which  are  substantially more active than those produced with higher solvent removal  temperatures. For  this reason, it is preferred  to remove  the non-polar  solvent  at about  40 to about  65 preferably at about 50°  C. by drying, distillation  or evaporation or  any  other  conventional means.

## POLYMERIZATION

catalyst precursor and other, more  conventional cata- 45  ried out in suspension, in solution or in the gas phase. Alpha-olefins  are  polymerized  with  the  catalysts pre pared  according  to  the  present  invention  by  any  suitable process. Such processes include polymerizations car Gas  phase  polymerization reactions are  preferred, e.g., those taking place in  stirred bed reactors and, espe cially, fluidized bed reactors.

The  catalyst composition of  this invention, activated with  TMA,  also exhibits extremely good  higher  alpha ties when  it is used to polymerize ethylene with such higher alpha-olefins. The  TMA ctivator is used in an a amount  which  is at  least effective to promote  the  poly merization activity of  the solid catalyst component  of sufficient to give an Al:transition metal molar  ratio in the catalyst composition of  about 15:1 to about 1000:1, preferably  about  20:1 to about  300:1, and  most  prefera bly  about  25:1 to  about 100:1.

The  resulting  free-flowing  powder,  referred  to  herein as a  catalyst  precursor,  is combined  with  the  trimethyl aluminum (TMA)  activator. We  found that the combi- 40 nation of  the  precursor  of  this  invention  with  the  TMA activator  produces  an  alpha-olefin polymerization  cata lyst  composition having very high activity, as com pared to a catalyst composition comprising the same lyst activators,  such  as  triethylaluminum (TEAL).  This is additionally  surprising  and  unexpected  because  other workers  in  this  field found  that, although  TMA  xhibits e some advantages with other catalyst precursor, it de al, EPO  Application No.  87300536.7,  publication No.  0 231 102, published  Aug.  8, 1987.

creases  the  activity  of  such  precursors,  e.g., See  Allen  et  50  trolled in a known manner, e.g.,  by using hydrogen. olefin (i.e.,  C3-C10  alpha-olefin) incorporation proper- 55  about 105  C.  This  control  of  molecular  weight  may  be The molecular weight of  the polymer may  be con With the catalysts produced according to the present invention, molecular  weight  may  be  suitably controlled with  hydrogen  when  the  polymerization  is carried out  a relatively  low temperature, e.g.,  from about 30  to evidenced by a measurable positive change in  melt index (I2) of  the polymer  produced.

this invention. The amount of the TMA  activator is  60  invention, as expressed by the melt flow ratio (MFR) Without  wishing  to  be  bound  by  any  theory  of  opera- 65  products,  produced  with  the  catalysts of  this invention, bility, it is believed that the  catalyst  composition  of  this invention is produced  by chemically impregnating the support  with  catalyst  components  sequentially  added  to The molecular weight distribution of the polymers prepared in the  presence  of  the  catalysts of  the present values, varies from about 20 to about 35, preferably about 20 to about 30, for LLDPE  products having a density of  about 0.900 to about 0.940, and an I2 (melt index) of  about 0.5 to about 100. Conversely, HDPE have a density of about 0.940 to about 0.965, MFR values of  about 20 to about 35, preferably about 20 to about 30, and I2 values  of  about  0.5 to about 100. As  is

9

15

known  to those  skilled in the  art, such  MFR alues  are v indicative of  a relatively narrow molecular weight  dis tribution of the polymer. As  is also known  to those skilled in the  art, such  MFR alues  are  indicative  of  the v polymers  especially  suitable  for  injection  molding  appli cations since the polymers having such MFR  values exhibit relatively low  amounts  of  warpage  and  shrink age on cooling of  the injection molded  products. The relatively low  MFR  values of  the polymers prepared with the catalysts of this invention also indicate that  10 they are suitable for the preparation of various film products since such films are likely to have excellent strength properties. MFR  s defined herein as the ratio i of  the  high load melt index (HLMI  or I21) divided by the melt  index, i.e.g.,

<!-- image -->

The  catalysts prepared according to the present in vention  are  highly  active  and  may  have  an  activity  of  at least  about  1-14  kilograms  of  olymer  per  gram  of  ata p c lyst per 100  psi of  ethylene in about 1  hour.

35

The  linear polyethylene  polymers  prepared  in accor dance  with the  present  invention are  homopolymers  of ethylene or copolymers of  ethylene with one or more C3-C10 alpha-olefins.  Thus, copolymers having two monomeric units are possible as well as terpolymers having three monomeric units. Particular examples of such polymers include ethylene/1-butene copolymers,  30 ethylene/1-hexene copolymers, ethylene/1-octene co polymers, ethylene/4-methyl-1-pentene  copolymers, ethylene/1-butene/1-hexane  terpolymers,  ethylene/propylene/1-hexane terpolymers and ethylene/propylene/1-butene terpolymers. When propylene is employed as a comonomer, the resulting linear low density polyethylene polymer preferably has at least one  other  alpha-olefin comonomer  having  at least four carbon atoms in an amount of at least  1  percent by weight of  the polymer. Accordingly, ethylene/propy lene copolymers are possible, but not preferred. The most  preferred comonomer  is 1-hexene. 25

10

herein by reference. The  polymer produced in such a reactor contains  the catalyst particles because  the cata lyst is not  separated from the polymer.

The  following  examples  further  illustrate  the  essential features of  the invention. However,  it will be  apparent to those  skilled in the  art that the  specific reactants  and reaction conditions used in the Examples do not limit the scope of  the  invention.

## EXAMPLE  1.

## (Catalyst Synthesis)

20.0 grams of Davison grade 955 silica which had been heated to 600  C. for about 16 hours under  a dry nitrogen purge  was  slurried in about  200  (milliters) mls of  dry  hexane  contained  in a  4-neck  500  ml  round  bot tom flask kept under a continuous nitrogen purge and fitted with an overhead stirrer and a reflux condenser. The  slurry  was  heated  to  and  maintained  are  reflux,  and 52.4 mls  of  dibutylmagnesium (DBM),  0.77  Molar  solu tion  in  heptane,  was  added  dropwise  to  the  slurry  (about 15  minutes)  and  the  reflux  continued  for  one  hour.  Next, 4.15 mls of  absolute ethanol diluted in about  40  mls of dry  hexane  was  added  dropwise  to the  slurry (about 15 minutes) and reflux continued for an additional hour. Finally, 2.4  mils of  TiCl4  diluted in about  40  mls  of  dry hexane was  added dropwise, the reflux was  continued for an additional hour, and solvents were removed  by distillation and  dried at about 85°-90°  C. to yield 21.3 grams of a  dry,  free-flowing powder. The resulting catalyst  precursor  contained 1.31 mmols  of  Mg/gram  of the  precursor,  0.731 mmols  of  Ti/gram  of  the  precursor, and  2.82 mmols  of  Cl/gram  of  the  precursor.

## EXAMPLES  2-7

## (Catalyst Synthesis)

Eight (8) additional catalyst precursor compositions were  synthesized in the manner  substantially the same as  that  of  Example  1, but  with  different  alcohols  used  in the synthesis. The  alcohols and  the Mg,  Ti, Cl  content of  the respective catalyst precursor compositions  is set forth below  in Table I:

TABLE  1.

|         | Alcohol            | Transition Metal   | Composition (MMOLS/GRAM of Catalyst Precursor)   | Composition (MMOLS/GRAM of Catalyst Precursor)   | Composition (MMOLS/GRAM of Catalyst Precursor)   | Mole Ratio of   |
|---------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| Exampie | Type               | Compound           | Mg                                               | Ti or V                                          | C1                                               | Mg/Tior V       |
|         | Ethanol            | TiCl4              | 31                                               | 0.731                                            | 2.82                                             | 79              |
| 2       | Methanol           | TiCl4              | 45                                               | 0.802                                            | 2.96                                             | 1.82            |
| 3       | n-Butanol          | TiCl4              | 1.27                                             | 0.729                                            | 2.73                                             | .75             |
| 4.      | n-Pentanoi         | TiCl4              | 28                                               | 0,764                                            | 2.63                                             | 67              |
| 5       | t-Butanol          | TiCl4              | .33                                              | 0.76                                             | 2.67                                             | .85             |
| 6       | Trichloro- ethanol | TiCl4              | 1.2                                              | 0.643                                            | 2.74                                             | 1.89            |
| 6A      | Trichloro- ethanol | VOCl3              | 1.6                                              | 0.489                                            | 2.39                                             | 2.38            |
| 7       | None               | TiCl4              | 1.49                                             | 0.701                                            | 2,70                                             | 2.13            |

The linear low density polyethylene polymers pro duced  in  accordance  with  the  present  invention  prefera bly  contain  at  least  about  80  percent  by  weight  of  thyl  60 e ene  units.

## EXAMPLES  8-14

## (Polymerization Process)

A  particularly desirable method  for producing  linear low density polyethylene polymers according to the present  invention is in a  fluid bed  reactor. Such  a  reac tor  and  means  for operating  it are described by  Levine  65  ethylene/1-hexane copolymers. A  typical polymeriza et  al, U.S. Pat. No.  4,011,382, Karol  et  al., U.S. Pat. No. 4,302,566 and  by  Nowlin  et al, U.S. Pat  No.  4,481,301, the entire contents of all  of which are incorporated The  catalyst  precursors of Examples 1-7 were  com bined with triethylaluminum (TEAL)  or with trimeth ylaluminum  (TMA) catalyst  activators  to  produce tion was carried out as follows with the catalyst of Example 1. At  about  50° C., and  under  a  slow  nitrogen purge, a 1.6 liter stainless steel autoclave, previously

11

heated  to  about  80° C.  under  purge  of  dry  nitrogen,  was filled with  400  mls  of  dry  hexane,  200  mls  of  dry 1-hex ane and 3.0 mls of  triethylaluminum (25 wt    in hex % ane). The  reactor  was  closed, and  hydrogen was  intro duced  to raise the internal pressure to  23  psi. The  con tents of  the reactor  was  stirred at  900  rpm  and  the  tem perature was  increased to about  70° C.

The  reactor was  filled with ethylene to a total pres sure  of  about  120  psi  and  then  0.1637  grams  of  Example 1  catalyst  precursor,  slurried  in  about  25  mols  of exane,  10 h was  added  to the reactor.  The  reactor  temperature  was adjusted to 80  C. and the reactor pressure was  main tained with ethylene.

The polymerization was continued for 50 minutes. 200  grams  of  polyethylene  were  obtained.  The  polymer contained 26.5 mole  %  1-hexane  and  it had  the follow ing properties:  I2  =0.58; I21  =  6.3;  I21/I2  =  8.1;  den 1 2 sity  =  .926 gm/cc. 0

5

The  productivies of  the catalyst compositions were determined as a function of the alcohol used in  the 20 synthesis of  the catalyst precursor and of  the catalyst activators.  The results  are  illustrated  graphically  in FIG.1. As is evident from FIG. 1,  trichloroethanol produced the most active catalyst precursor, with the thanol-based-catalyst system  decayed relatively rapidly (half-life of  about  40  minutes).  The  data  of  FIG.  1 indi cates that  the  TMA ctivator  produces  catalyst compo a sitions having  2-3  times  greater productivities than  the TEAL  activator used to activate the  same  catalyst  pre CSOS.

12

liters  of  anhydrous isopentane and stirred while a 20 percent  by  weight  solution of  diethylaluminum  chloride in anhydrous hexane was  added thereto over a hour period. The diethylaluminum chloride (DEAC) solu tion was  employed in an amount  sufficient to provide 0.36 mols  of  this compound  per  mol  of  tetrahydrofuran (THF)  in the  precursor.  After  addition of  the  diethylal uminum chloride was completed, stirring was contin ued for an additional to hour  while  a  20  percent  by weight solution of tri-n-hexylaluminum (TNHAL) in anhydrous  hexane  was  added  in an  amount  sufficient to provide  0.25 mols  of  this compound  per mol  of  tetrahy drofuran in the precursor. The  mixture was  then dried under  a  nitrogen  purge  at  a  temperature  of  56-10 C. over a period of  about  4  hours to provide a dry, free flowing powder. This material was stored under dry nitrogen until it was  needed.

## EXAMPLE  16

## (Preparation of  LLDPE  Product.  With TEAL-Activated Precursor  of  Example 15(b))

TEAL  or TMA  activators.  However, the trichloroe 25  of DEAC/THF    .36 and TNHAL/THF=0.25,  was The  partially activated comparative catalyst precur sor  composition  of  Example  15(b), with  the  molar  ratios =0 used  to  prepare LLDPE roduct  in a 1.6 liter autoclave p reactor.  Reaction conditions were similar to those in Example 9. The productivity was about 4,000 grams PE/gr  cat/hour.

30

## EXAMPLE 7

## EXAMPLE  15

## (Comparative Catalyst Precursor Synthesis)

A  comparative catalyst precursor was synthesized  35 according to the teachings of Karol et al,  European patent application No. 84103441.6, filed  on Mar. 28, 1984, Publication No. 0 120 503, published on Oct. 3, 1984.  This  catalyst precursor  is substantially equivalent to  that  of  Karol  et  al, as  disclosed  in the  aforementioned Published European Patent Application. It is also sub stantially equivalent to the precursors prepared by  the following representative procedure.

- (a) Impregnation  of  Support with Precursor

In a 12 liter flask equipped with a mechanical  stirrer  45 were  placed  41.8  g  (0.439  mol)  of  anhydrous  MgCl2 nd a 2.5 liters  of tetrahydrofuran (THF). To  this mixture, 29.0 (0.146 mol) of  TiCl30.33 AlCl3  were  added drop wise  over  a hour  period.  The  mixture  was  then  heated at 60°  C. for another hour in order to completely  50 dissolve the material.

Five  hundred  grams  (500  g)  of  silica  were  dehydrated by  heating  at  a  temperature  of  600  C.  and  slurried in 3 liters of  isopentane.  The lurry  was  stirred  while 186 ml s of  a  20  percent  by  weight  solution of  triethylaluminum 55 in hexane  was  added  thereto over  a hour  period. The resulting  mixture  was  then  dried  under  a  nitrogen  purge at 60° C. over a period of  about 4  hours to provide a dry, free-flowing powder containing 5.5  percent by weight  of  the aluminum  alkyl.

## (Preparation of  LLDPE  Proccuts with TMA-Activated  Comparative Precursor of Example 15(b))

The  partially activated comparative precursor com position  of Example 15(b)  with the molar ratios  of DEAC/THF  =  .36  and  TNHAL/THF   .25,  was 0 =0 used  to  prepare LLDPE  product  in a 1.6 liter autoclave reactor. Reaction conditions were  substantially equiva lent  to  those  of  Example  9, except  that  a  TMA  ctivator a was  used  in place of  TEAL.  Catalyst productivity was about 4,100 gms PE/gm  cat/hour.

## EXAMPLE  1.8

## (Effect of  Increasing Amounts  of  Cocatalyst on  MFR of  Polymers)

To  determine the effect of  increasing the amount  of TMA  and  TEAL  cocatalyst on the MFR  of  the poly mers  produced  with  the  resulting  catalyst  compositions, the performance of a catalyst precursor substantially similar  to  that  of  Example  1 was  compared  to that  of  the comparative catalyst precursor of Example 15b, both activated with varying  amounts  of  the  TMA r  TEAL o cocatalysts.  The  polymerizations  were  conducted  in the manner  summarized  below:

The treated silica  was then added to the solution prepared as above. The  resulting slurry was  stirred for hour  and  then  dried under  a  nitrogen purge  at 60° C. over  a  period  of  about  4  hours  to  provide  a  dry,  impreg nated, free-flowing powder.

- (i) The silica-impregnated  precursor  composition prepared in accordance  with step (a) was  slurried in 3
- (b) Preparation of Partially Activated Precursor

60  TEAL  or TMA.  Various amounts of  cocatalyst were 65  hydrogen was  added  from  a  calibrated hoke  bomb,  the 400 mls of  dry hexane was  added  to a 1.6 liter auto clave  at 56' C.  while  under  a  slow  nitrogen purge. 200 mils (135 grams) of 1-hexane was added, followed by added  to  give  the  concentration ranges  shown  in FIGS. 5 and 6. Concentration of  co-catalyst is  expressed as ppm  based  on  the  total weight  of  hexane  and 1-hexene used  in  the  polymerization.  The  reactor  was  closed,  and contents were stirred at 900 rpm  and the temperature was increased to 70°  C. Ethylene was added to the autoclave to 120 psi and about 0.03-0.06 grams of  the

13

catalyst  precursor  was  injected  with  ethylene  overpres sure. The temperature was maintained at 80  C. and 150-200 grams of  copolymer was produced in 50-60 minutes.  The  effect of  increasing  amounts  of  the  TMA or TEAL  activator on the MFR  of the polymers is shown  graphically in FIGS.  5  and  6.

14

molecule  is inserted 152  times  for  every 1-hexene  mole cule that is inserted into the polymer molecule.

## Molecular  Weight Distribution (MWD)  of  Polymers

EXAMPLES 19-20 Polymerizations were  carried out  similarly to Exam 5 ples  9-14, except  that  450  mls  of  hexane  and 150  mls  of 10  increases  from  about  29 to 31 (TEAL)  as the 1-hexene 1-hexene  were  used.  TEAL 3 mls  of  a  25  wt  %  olution ( s in hexane) was  used as the catalyst activator. The  effect  of  catalyst  composition  and  cocatalysts  on the  MWD f  the  copolymers  is summarized  in FIGS.  2 o and  3. FIG.  2  shows  that  the  MFR  or  the  ethanol-based f catalyst  of  Example  1 depends  on  both  copolymer  com position and cocatalyst type.  For example, the MFR content increases. from 2.4 mole% (density of 0.926 gms/cc)  to 4.0 mole  % density of  0.914  gms/cc).  Over (

TABLE  II

| Comparision of Titanium and Vanadium Based Catalysts   | Comparision of Titanium and Vanadium Based Catalysts   | Comparision of Titanium and Vanadium Based Catalysts   | Comparision of Titanium and Vanadium Based Catalysts   | Comparision of Titanium and Vanadium Based Catalysts   | Comparision of Titanium and Vanadium Based Catalysts   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Catalyst Of Example                                    | Example                                                | Transition Metal                                       | Productivity (gm/gm/hr/100 psi)                        | MFR (I2)                                               | r                                                      |
| 6                                                      | 19                                                     | TiCl4                                                  | 5150                                                   | 32 (75)                                                | 10                                                     |
| 6A                                                     | 20                                                     | VOCl3                                                  | 730                                                    | 81 (23)                                                | 39                                                     |

## DISCUSSION  OF  EXAMPLES

The  reactivity of  each catalyst used  to copolymerize ethylene with 1-hexene is  dependent on the catalyst composition.  The  1-hexene response  is expressed  below as a reactivity ratio, r1, defined by  the equation:

25  data therefore indicates that, unexpectedly, TMA ro the same range, copolymers prepared with TMA  as cocatalyst have  MFR alues from about  27 to 29. The v p vides polymers  with  a  narrower  MWD  s indicated by a MFR  values that are  about 1-2  MFR nits lower  com u pared  to  polymers  prepared  with  TEAL-activated  cata lysts.

where f=(CE/CH)copolymer F=(CE/CH)monomer r=kEE/kEH In the above formulae, subscripts E  and H  designate  35  of  about 38 to about 42. Copolymers produced with ethylene and hexene, respectively. Thus, lower values of  r  indicate  improved 1-hexene  incorporation  proper ties. Table III summarizes the catalyst  reactivity ratios with 1-hexene  as  a  function of  alcohol used  or  a  transi tion metal compound on the precursor synthesis and activator. TABLE  III 30 45  prepared with the ethanol-based catalysts. FIG. 3 shows  a similar trend for other catalysts (of Examples 1, 2, 6  and  7)  prepared  with  different  alcohols with TEAL  or TMA  as a cocatalyst.  However, the copolymer  prepared with an alcohol-free catalyst pro vided the  broadest  MWD,  as  indicated by  MFR alues v catalysts synthesized with alcohol gave MFR  values ranging from  about  27  to  about  35, depending  on  alco hol type  and  cocatalyst. Thus, catalysts based on  etha nol and TMA  give copolymers with the narrowest MWD.  Catalysts  based  on  methanol  and  2,2,2-trichloro ethanol produce copolymers with MFR  values in the 32-37 range depending on density and cocatalyst. At the same density, these catalysts give products with MFR  values about 2-6 units higher than copolymers

## Comparison of  Titanium  and Vanadium Based Catalysts of  Examples  6  and  6a

50  prepared, one with TiCl4 (Example 6) and one with Two  catalysts based on 2,2,2-trichloroethanol were VOCl3  (Example  6A).  The  comparison of  the  effect of the  transition metal  on  the  catalyst  properties  is summa rized in Table  III.

55  based on titanium is about  7 times more  active and  in The  data  in  Tables  II  and  III  indicate  that  the  catalyst corporate 1-hexene about 2.5 times more  slowly than the vanadium-based catalyst. However, the vanadium based catalyst provides a copolymer with a relatively broad MWD.

| Catalyst of Example   | Alcohol                 | Transition Metal Compound   | Activator   | r          |
|-----------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------|------------|
|                       | ethanol                 | TiCl4                       | TEAL        | 196 11     |
|                       | ethanol                 | TiCl4                       | TMA         | 1529       |
| 6A                    | 2,2,2-Trichloro ethanol | VOCL3                       | TEAL        | 39.1 - 6.1 |
| 6A                    | same                    | VOCL3                       | TMA         | 39. 6.1    |
| 6                     | Sale                    | TiCl4                       | TEAL        | O1 0.8     |
| 6                     | sale                    | TiCl4                       | TMA         | 101 - 0.8  |
| 15(b)                 | none                    | TiCl4                       | TEAL        | 130        |
| (Comp.)               | (Comp.)                 | (Comp.)                     | (Comp.)     | (Comp.)    |
| 15(b) (Comp.)         | none                    | TiCl4                       | TMA         | 130        |

The  data of  Table III indicates that the catalysts pre pared  with  all of  the  alcohols, except  2,2,2-trichlorore thanol,  react relatively  poorly with  1-hexene in  the  60 presence  of  TEAL s the  activator  (r1  =  96) indicating a 1 that an  ethylene molecule  is inserted 196  times  into the polymer molecule for every 1-hexene molecule  that is inserted  during  the  polymerization  reaction.  In  the  pres a cantly lower  (r1  = 529),  indicating improved (about 1 22%  better) 1-hexene  incorporation properties  with  the TMA-activated catalyst  precursor,  i.e.,  an ethylene

## Effect of  Drying  Temperature

ence  of  the  TMA  ctivator,  the  reactivity  ratio is  signifi  65  from  90° C.  (Example  1) to  55° C.  Aside  from  the  differ To  test  the  effect,  if  any,  of  drying  temperature  on  the catalyst  properties,  a  catalyst  was repared  in  which  the p temperature used to remove the solvents was  lowered ent drying  temperatures,  the  catalyst  synthesis  was  car ried out substantially as in Example 1. The results are summarized  in FIG.  4.

15

The  data  indicate  that  the  productivity  of his  catalyst t precursor is particularly sensitive to the drying condi tions. The  precursor  dried  at 55  C.  is about  25  percent more productive than the precursor dried at 90°  C. Consequently, to maintain high catalyst productivity,  5 the catalyst precursor should preferably be dried at 40-65  C.

16

- 6. A  process of  claim 5 wherein R"  is a C1-Cs  alkyl group.
- 7. A rocess  of  claim  6  wherein  R"  is a  methyl,  ethyl, p propyl or butyl group.
- 8. A  process of  claim 7  wherein the transition metal compound  is a compound  of  titanium or vanadium.

## Effect of  Increasing Activator Amounts

- 9. A  process of  claim 8 wherein the transition metal compound  is titanium halide.
- 10. A  process of  claim 9  wherein  the titanium halide
- 11. A  process of  claim 10 wherein the titanium tet rahalide is TiCl4.
- 12. A  process of  claim 10 wherein  the amount  of  the TiCl4  present  in  said  step  (iii) is  such  that  the  molar  ratio of  Mg  to Ti  is about 1 to about 3.

The  data  of  FIG.  5  indicates  that  increased  content  of 10  is titanium tetrahalide. TEAL  produces catalyst compositions which  produce polymers  of  increasing  MFR alues  for  both,  the  inven v tive and the comparative catalyst precursor composi tions. The  data of FIG. 6, however, indicates that in creased content of TMA  produces catalyst composi tions which  produce  polymers  of  substantially constant MFR  values  for  both  the  inventive  and  the  comparative catalyst precursor  compositions.

- 13. A  process  of  claim 12 wherein the amount  of  the TiCl4  present  in said  step  (ii) is such  that the  molar  ratio of  Mg  to Ti is about  2  to about  3.

20

15

The  ability to  produce  polymers  of  substantially  con stant  low  MFR  values regardless  of  the  cocatalyst  con tent  is important  in order  to produce  the  same  polyeth ylene  product  with  superior  physical  properties,  such  as low  shrinking  and  warpage  for  injection molding  appli cations.

- 14. A  process of  claim 13 wherein the solid, porous carrier contains OH roups. g
- 25  6:1. 15. A  process of  claim 14  wherein the amount  of  the organomagnesium composition used in said step (i)  is such  that  the  molar  ratio of  g:OH s about  1:1 to  about M i

It will be  apparent  to those  skilled in the  art that the specific embodiments discussed above can be success fully repeated with ingredients equivalent to those ge nerically or  specifically set  forth  above  and  under  vari able process conditions.

- 16. A  process of  claim 15 wherein the  amount  of  the organomagnesium composition used in said step (i)  is such  that  the  molar  ratio of  Mg-OH  s about  2:1 to  about i 4:1.

3O

From the foregoing specification, one skilled in the art can readily ascertain the essential features of this invention and without departing from the spirit and scope thereof  can adapt it to various diverse applica tions.

- 17. A  process  of  claim 16  wherein  the  amount  of  the organomagnesium composition used in said step (i)  is such that the molar ratio of Mg:OH  is about 2.1:1  to about 3.5:1.

We  claim:

- 1. A  process for preparing a supported alpha-olefin polymerization catalyst composition which comprises the steps of:
- 35  organomagnesium composition used in said step (i)  is 18. A  process  of  claim 17  wherein the  amount  of  the such that the molar ratio of  Mg:OH  is about 3:1.
- (i) contacting  a  slurry  of  a  solid, porous  carrier  and  a 40  100  C. to about 1000  C. non-polar solvent with at least  one organomag nesium composition having the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R  and R' are the same  or different C4-C12 alkyl groups, m  and  n  are  each  0,  1  or  2, provided that m-n  is equal to the valence of  Mg;

- 19. A  process of  claim 18 wherein the solid, porous carrier is silica which,  prior  to contact  thereof  with  the solvent in step (i), is heated at a temperature of  about
- 20. A  process  of  claim  19  wherein  the  silica is heated at a  temperature  of  about 800  C.
- 45  about  0.5  mmoles/gr,  a  surface  area  of  300  m2/gram  and 21.  A rocess  of  claim  20  wherein  the  silica has, after p the heating, surface hydroxyl group concentration of a pore volume  of  1.65 m/gram.
- (ii) contacting the  slurry of  step (i) with at least one compound  of  the formula
- 50  non-polar  solvent. 22.  A rocess  of  claim  21 wherein  the  product  of  said p step (iii),  prior to conducting  said step (iv), is dried at about 40  to about 65  C. to substantially remove the

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R' is  a C1-C10 alkyl group or a C1-C10 halogenated alkyl group;

- 23. A  supported  alpha-olefin polymerization catalyst composition prepared by:

55

- (iii) contacting  the  slurry of  step (ii) with  at least one transition metal compound  soluble  in the  non-polar solvent; and

60

- (iv) combining  the  product  of  step (iii) with  trimeth ylaluminum.
- 2. A rocess  of  claim 1  wherein R nd  R'  are  C4-C10 p a alkyl groups.
- 3. A rocess of  claim 2 wherein R  and R' are C4-C8 p alkyl groups.
- 4. A  process of  claim 3 wherein R  and R' are each 65 butyl groups, m  is 1  and  n  is 1.
- 5. A rocess  of  claim  4  wherein  the  non-polar  solvent p is  a  ydrocarbon  which  is a  liquid  at  ambient  conditions. h
- (i) contacting  a  slurry  of  a  solid, porous  carrier and  a non-polar solvent with at least  one organomag nesium  composition having the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R  and R are the same  or different C4-C12 alkyl groups, m  and n  are  each  0, 1  or  2, provided that m-n  is equal to the valence of  Mg;

- (ii) contacting the  slurry of  step (i) with  at least one compound  of  the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R' is  a C1-C10 alkyl group or a C1-C10 halogenated alkyl group;

17

- (iii) contacting  the  slurry of  step  (ii) with  at least one transition metal  compound  soluble  in the  non-polar solvent; and
- (iv) combining  the  product  of  step  (iii) with  trimethyl aluminum.
- 24. A atalyst composition  of  claim  23  wherein R  and c R" are C4-C10  alkyl groups.
- 25.  A  atalyst  composition  of  claim  24  wherein R nd c a R" are C4-C8  alkyl groups.
- 26.  A  atalyst  composition  of  claim  25  wherein R nd c a R" are each  butyl groups, m  s 1 and  n is 1. i
- 27. A  catalyst composition of  claim 26 wherein the non-polar  solvent  is a  hydrocarbon  which  is a  liquid at ambient conditions.
- 28. A atalyst  composition  of  claim  27  whrein R"  is a c C1-C3  alkyl group.

18

- (iv), is  dried  at  about  40 to  about  65° C.  to  substantially remove the non-polar solvent.
- 46. A  process of  claim 8  wherein the amount  of  the transition metal compound present in said step (iii)  is such  that  the  molar  ratio of  Mg o  the  transition metal  is t about 1 to about 3.
- 10  no  excess  of  the  formula  (II)  compound  is present  in the 15  that which  can  be  deposited on  the carrier. 45. A  process  of  claim 1 wherein  in said step (i) only such  an  amount  of  the  organomagnesium  composition  is used which will be deposited onto the carrier; in said step (ii) only such an amount  of  the compound  of  the formula (II) is used which is sufficient to convert sub stantially all of  the magnesium  alkyl groups  on  the car rier to magnesium alkoxy groups, so that substantially non-polar solvent after substantially all of  the magne sium groups are converted to the magnesium alkoxy groups;  and  in  said  step  (iii) such  an  amount  of  the  tran sition metal  compound  is used  which  is not  greater  than
- 29. A  catalyst composition  of  claim  28  wherein R"  is a methyl, ethyl, propyl or  butyl group.

20

- 30. A  catalyst composition of  claim 29 wherein the transition metal  compound  is a  compound  of  titanium  or vanadium.
- 31. A  catalyst composition of  claim 30 wherein the transition metal compound  is titanium halide.
- 47. A  process of  claim 46  wherein  the  amount  of  the transition metal compound present in said step (iii)  is such  that  the  molar  ratio of  Mg o  the  transition metal  is t about  2  to about  3.
- 32. A  catalyst composition of  claim 31 wherein the 25  transition metal compound present in said step (iii)  is titanium halide is titanium tetrahalide. 48. A  process  of  claim  46  wherein  the  amount  of  the such  that  the  molar  ratio  of  Mg o  the  transition metal  is t about 1.65 to about  2.40.
- 49. A rocess  of  claim  22  wherein  the  produce  of  said p step (iii),  prior to conduting said step (iv), is dried at
- 33. A  catalyst composition of  claim 32 wherein the titanium tetrahalide is TiCl4.
- 34. A  catalyst composition of  claim 33 wherein the amount  of  the  TiCl4  present  in  said step  (iii) is such  that  30  about  45  to about  55  C. the molar ratio of  Mg o Ti  is about 1 to about  3. t
- 50. A rocess  of  claim  49  wherein  the  product  of  said p step (iii), prior to conducting said step (iv), is dried at about 50  C.
- 36. A  catalyst composition of  claim 35 wherein the  35  step (i) only  such an amount  of  the organomagnesium solid, porous carrier contains OH roups. g 37. A  catalyst composition of  claim 36  wherein the amount of  the organomagnesium composition used in said step (i) is such that the molar ratio of Mg:OH  is about 1:1 to about  6:1. 38. A  catalyst composition of  claim 37  wherein the amount of  the organomagnesium composition used in said step (i) is such that the molar ratio of  Mg:OH  is about  2:1 to  about  4:1. 45  the transition  metal compound is  used which is  not 51.  A  atalyst  composition  of  claim  23  wherein  in said c composition is used which will be deposited onto the carrier; in said  step  (ii) only  such  an  amount  of  the  com pound  of  the formula (II) is used which  is sufficient to convert  substantially  all of  the  magnesium  alkyl groups on the carrier to magnesium alkoxy groups, so that substantially no  excess of  the  formula  (II) compound  is present  in the  non-polar  solvent  after  substantially  all of the  magnesium  groups  are  converted  to the  magnesium alkoxy groups; and  in said step (iii) such an amount  of greater  than  that  which  can  be  deposited on  the  carrier.
- 35. A  catalyst composition of  claim 34  wherein the amount  of  the  TiCl4  present  in  said  step (iii) is such  that the molar  ratio of  Mg o Ti  is about  2  to about  3. t
- 39. A  catalyst composition of  claim 38 wherein the amount of  the organomagnesium composition used in said step (i) is such that the molar ratio of  Mg:OH  is about  2.5:1 to about  3.5:1.
- 40. A  catalyst composition of  claim 39 wherein the amount of  the organomagnesium composition used in said step (i) is such that the molar ratio of  Mg:OH  is about  3:1.
- 50  about 1  to  about  3. 52. A atalyst of  claim 30  wherein the  amount  of  the c transition metal compound present in said step (iii) is such  that  the  molar  ratio of  Mg o  the  transition metal  is t
- 41. A  catalyst composition of  claim 40 wherein the solid, porous carrier is silica which, prior to contact thereof  with  the  solvent  in  step  (i), is  heated  at  a  temper ature of  about 100  C. to about 1000  C.
- 53. A  catalyst of  claim 52  wherein  the  amount  of  the transition metal compound present in said step (iii)  is such  that  the  molar  ratio  of  Mg o  the  transition metal  is t about  2  to about 3.

55

- 42. A  catalyst composition of  claim 41 wherein the silica is heated at a  temperature  of  about  800° C.
- 54. A atalyst of  claim 52  wherein the  amount  of  the c transition metal compound present in said step (iii)  is such  that  the  molar  ratio of  Mg o  the  transition metal  is t about 1.65 to about  2.40.
- 43. A  catalyst composition of  claim 42  wherein the 60  step (iii), prior to conducting  said step (iv), is dried at 55.  A  atalyst  of  claim  44  wherein  the  product  of  said c about  45  to about 55  C.
- 44. A  catalyst composition of  claim 43 wherein the product of  said step (iii), prior to conducting said step  65
- 56. A  catalyst composition of  claim 55 wherein the product of  said step (iii), prior to conducting  said step (iv), is dried at about  50  C.
- silica  has, after the heating, surface hydroxyl group concentration  of  about  0.5 mmoles/gr,  a  surface  area  of 300  m2/gram  and  a  pore  volume  of  1.65 m3/gram.

it is