## (12)  United  States Patent Maheshwari et al.

## (54) HIGH  STRENGTH  POLYETHYLENE  FILM

(75)

Inventors:  Vinayak  Maheshwari,  Dunbar, WV (US); Robert  Charles  Job, Bound Brook, NJ  (US); William  A. Hoffman, III, Ridgewood, NJ  (US); William James  Michie,  Jr., Raritan, NJ  (US)

(73)

Assignee:  Union  Carbide  Chemicals &amp;  Plastics Technology Corporation, Danbury, CT (US)

(*)  Notice:

Subject  to any  disclaimer,  the term of  this patent is extended or adjusted under 35 U.S.C. 154(b) by  0  days.

(21) Appl. No.: 09/455,234

(22) Filed:

Dec. 6, 1999

(51) Int. Cl.

...............................

C08F8/00; CO8L  23/00

(52)

U.S. Cl. .............................................  525/191; 525/240

(58) Field of  Search ......................................  525/191,  240

USOO6248831B1

<!-- image -->

(10) Patent No.:

US  6,248,831 B1

(45)  Date  of  Patent:

Jun.  19,  2001

## (56) References Cited

## U.S. PATENT  DOCUMENTS

| 5,047,468   | 9/1991 Lee et al. ...............................     |
|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| 5,122,494   | 52.5/53 6/1992 Job ....... ... 502/125                |
| 5,371,157   | 12/1994 Job .............. ... 526/124                |
| 5,405,901   | 4/1995 Daniell et al. ...... ... 525/53               |
| 5,503,914   | * 4/1996 Michie, Jr. et al. ................. 428/220 |

428/220

* cited by  examiner

Primary Examiner  Nathan M.  Nutter

(74) Attorney,  Agent, or Firm-Saul R. Bresch

## (57) ABSTRACT

A  proceSS for production of a polyethylene blend in Situ comprising  contacting  ethylene and  at  least  one  alpha-olefin with  a magnesium/titanium  based  catalyst  System including a  partially  activated  precursor  and  a  cocatalyst  in  each  of  two fluidized bed reactors connected in Series, one of  the pro VisoS being that the precursor is formed by contacting an alkylaluminum  halide with  a  Solid reaction  product  prepared from  a magnesium  alkoxide, a titanium tetraalkoxide, and  a Solubility enhancing  agent.

## 11 Claims, No Drawings

1

## HIGH  STRENGTH  POLYETHYLENE  FILM

## TECHNICAL  FIELD

This  invention relates  to a  process  for  preparing  an  in  Situ polyethylene  blend,  which  can  be  converted  into  film  having an  improved  balance of  high  Strength and  exemplary  extru Sion characteristics.

## BACKGROUND  INFORMATION

There  has  been  a  rapid  growth  in  the market  for  linear  low density  polyethylene  (LLDPE), particularly  resin  made under mild operating conditions, typically at preSSures of 100  to 300  psi and  reaction temperatures of  less than 100 C. This low pressure proceSS provides a broad range of LLDPE  products  for  blown  and  cast  film,  injection molding, rotational molding, blow molding, pipe, tubing, and wire and cable  applications.  LLDPE has essentially  a  linear backbone with only short chain branches, about 2 to  6 carbon  atoms  in length. In LLDPE,  the length  and  frequency of  branching,  and,  consequently,  the density,  is  controlled  by the type and amount of comonomer  used in the polymer ization. Although the majority of the LLDPE  resins on the market  today have a narrow molecular  weight distribution, LLDPE  resins with a broad molecular weight distribution are available for a number  of non-film applications.

1O

15

LLDPE  resins designed for commodity  type applications typically incorporate 1-butene  as  the  comonomer.  The  use  of  25 a  higher  molecular weight alpha-olefin  comonomer pro duces resins with  Significant Strength advantages  relative to those  of ethylene/1-butene copolymers. The predominant higher alpha-olefin  comonomers in  commercial use  are 1-hexene,  4-methyl-1-pentene,  and  1-octene.  The  bulk  of  the LLDPE  is used  in film  products  where  the  excellent  physical properties and drawdown characteristics of LLDPE film makes this film well Suited for a broad  Spectrum of appli cations. Fabrication of  LLDPE  film is generally  effected  by the  blown  film  and  Slot casting  processes.  The  resulting  film is characterized by excellent tensile Strength, high  ultimate elongation, good impact Strength, and excellent puncture resistance. 35

These properties together with toughneSS are enhanced when the  polyethylene  is  of high  molecular  weight. However, as  the  molecular  weight  of the  polyethylene increases, the processability of  the resin usually decreases. By  providing  a  blend  of  polymers,  the properties  character istic of high molecular weight resins can be retained and processability,  particularly the  extrudability  (from  the  lower molecular weight  component) can be improved.

The blending  of  these polymerS  is Successfully achieved in a  Staged  reactor  proceSS  Similar  to  those  described  in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,047,468 and 5,149,738. Briefly, the process is one for the in Situ blending of  polymers wherein a higher density ethylene  copolymer  is prepared  in a  high  melt  indeX reactor  and a lower  density ethylene copolymer  is prepared in a  low  melt  indeX  reactor.  The  process  typically  comprises continuously  contacting,  under  polymerization  conditions,  a mixture of ethylene and one or more alpha-olefins with a catalyst System in  two gas phase, fluidized bed reactors connected in Series, said catalyst System comprising: (i) a Supported  magnesium/titanium based  catalyst  precursor;  (ii) an aluminum containing activator compound; and (iii)  a hydrocarbyl aluminum cocatalyst, the polymerization con ditions  being  Such  that  an  ethylene  copolymer  having  a  melt index  in the range of  about 0.1 to about 1000  grams  per 10 minutes is formed in the high melt indeX reactor and an ethylene copolymer having a melt indeX in the  range of about  0.001  to about 1 gram  per 10  minutes  is formed  in the low melt  indeX  reactor, each  copolymer  having  a density of about  0.860  to about  0.965  gram  per  cubic  centimeter  and  a melt  flow  ratio in the range  of  about  22  to  about  70,  with  the provisoS that:

40

45

50 55 60  films  with  higher  bubble  strength and  stability together  with Several  patents  have  Successfully addressed  the gel  prob lem.  One such  patent  is  U.S.  Pat.  No.  5,405,901. Unfortunately, this patent, for example, Suffers from other deficiencies. The extrusion line Speed  of  the product resin, which  is a measure  of  bubble  strength  and  stability, is found to  be  in  the neighborhood  of  90  feet  per  minute,  and  the dart drop  Strength, while high  for  one mil  film, is not  achievable on  0.5  mil  film  due  to low  bubble  stability. Meanwhile,  in  the realm of  high and medium  density, high molecular weight film applications, industry is Seeking resins with minimum extrusion line Speeds of  about 210  feet per  minute and  thus higher dart drop Strength in the narrower  gauges.

2

- (a) the mixture of  ethylene copolymer matrix and  active catalyst  formed in  the  first  reactor in  the  Series  is transferred to the Second reactor in the Series,
- (b) other  than  the active catalyst referred  to in  proviso  (a) and the cocatalyst referred to in proviso (e), no addi tional catalyst is introduced into the Second reactor;
- (c) in the high melt index reactor:
- (1)  the  alpha-olefin is present  in  a  ratio of  about  0.02  to about  3.5 moles  of  alpha-olefin  per  mole  of  ethylene; and
- (2)  hydrogen  is  present in a  ratio of  about  0.05  to about 3 moles  of  hydrogen  per  mole  of  combined  ethylene and  alpha-olefin;
- (d) in the low melt index reactor:
- (1)  the  alpha-olefin is present  in  a  ratio of  about  0.02  to about  3.5 moles  of  alpha-olefin  per  mole  of  ethylene; and
- (2) hydrogen is, optionally, present in a ratio of  about 0.0001 to about 0.5 mole of hydrogen per mole of combined  ethylene and alpha-olefin; and
- (e) additional hydrocarbyl aluminum cocatalyst is intro duced  into the Second  reactor  in  an  amount  Sufficient  to restore the level of  activity of  the catalyst transferred from  the first reactor  to about  the  initial level  of  activity in the first reactor.

While the in situ blends  prepared as above and  the films produced therefrom are  found to have the advantageous characteristics heretofore mentioned, the commercial  appli cation of these granular bimodal polymerS is  limited by unacceptable levels of  gels  in contrast to competitive  bimo dal resins produced from Slurry or Solution processes. Par ticle size distribution and  flow characteristics Studies indi cate that  the gas  phase  resins  having  an  average  particle size (APS)  of  about  400  to about  600  microns  exhibit  significant compositional, molecular, and rheological heterogeneities. When  Such a granular resin is compounded, for example, with a conventional twin  Screw mixer  in a  single pass, and the resulting  pellets  are  fabricated  into film,  the film  exhibits a  high  level  of  gels  ranging  in size from  less  than  about  100 microns to  greater than  about 500 microns. These gels adversely  effect  the aesthetic appearance  of  the product.  The gel characteristics of  a film product are usually designated by a subjective scale of Film Appearance Rating (FAR) varying  from minus  50  (very poor; these films have  a large number  of  large  gels)  to  plus  50 very  good;  these  films  have ( a Small  amount  of, or essentially no, gels). The FAR  of  the Single pass  film  product  mentioned  above  is generally in the range of  about minus  50  to about  minus  10/0. For  commer cial acceptability, the FAR  should be plus 20  or better.

## DISCLOSURE  OF  THE  INVENTION

65

An object of this invention, therefore, is  to provide a process  for  preparing  an  in  Situ  blend,  which,  can be extruded into a film at high line Speeds, the film having  the bubble strength  and stability,  which translates into  high

3

Strength,  particularly  in  terms  of  dart  drop.  Other  objects  and advantages will become apparent hereinafter.

According  to the present  invention  Such  a  proceSS  for the production of  a polyethylene blend in Situ has  been  discov ered. The  proceSS  comprises  contacting  ethylene  and  at  least one alpha-olefin comonomer  having 3 to 8 carbon atoms with  a magnesium/titanium  based  catalyst  System including a  partially  activated  precursor  and  a  cocatalyst  in  each  of  two fluidized bed  reactors connected  in Series, in the gas  phase, under polymerization conditions, with the provisoS that:

- (a) the precursor is formed  by  contacting an alkylalumi num  halide with  a  Solid  reaction  product  prepared  from a magnesium alkoxide, a titanium tetraalkoxide, and  a Solubility enhancing  agent;
- (b) the mixture of  ethylene copolymer matrix and  active catalyst  formed in  the  first  reactor  in  the  Series  is transferred to the Second reactor in the Series,
- (c) other  than  the active catalyst referred  to  in  proviso  (b) and the cocatalyst referred to in proviso (f), no addi tional catalyst is introduced into the Second reactor;
- (d) in the first reactor in which  a low  melt  index  copoly mer  is made:
- (1) alpha-olefin is present in a ratio of  about 0.005 to about  0.4 mole  of  alpha-olefin  per  mole  of  ethylene;
- (2) hydrogen is, optionally, present in a ratio of  about 0.0001 to about 0.3 mole of hydrogen per mole of ethylene, and
- (3) the  ethylene  partial  pressure  is in  the range of  about 10  to about 100  pounds  per Square inch; and
- (e)  in  the Second reactor in which a high melt index copolymer  is made:
- (1)  alpha-olefinis,  optionally,  present  in a  ratio of  about 0.005 to about  0.6 mole of  alpha-olefin per mole of ethylene,
- (2) hydrogen is, optionally, present in a ratio of  about 1.0 to about 3.0 moles of hydrogen per mole of ethylene, and
- (3) the  ethylene  partial  pressure  is in  the range of  about 50  to about 120  pounds  per Square inch, and
- (f)  additional hydrocarbyl aluminum cocatalyst is intro  45 duced  into the Second  reactor  in  an  amount  Sufficient  to restore the level of  activity of  the catalyst transferred from  the first reactor  to about  the  initial level  of  activity in the first reactor.

4

Preferred comonomer  combinations:

| first reactor                       | second reactor                      |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| 1-hexene 1-butene 1-butene 1-hexene | 1-hexene 1-hexene 1-butene 1-butene |

20

15  FDA  allowable comonomer content, e.g.,  for a 1-hexene The 1-hexene/1-hexene combination is found  to give the best film properties; however, the 1-hexene/1-butene com bination  is found  to  provide  acceptable  properties  while  Still meeting  FDA  pecifications  since a  terpolymer  increases  the S copolymer, the maximum  allowable comonomer  content is 10 percent by weight whereas for  a  1-hexene/1-butene terpolymer, the maximum  allowable comonomer  content is 15 percent by weight. For FDA  purposes, the 1-hexene/1hexene combination is  considered a copolymer and the 1-hexene/1-butene combination is considered a terpolymer.

25

It  will  be  understood  that  the  in  situ  blend  can  be characterized  as  a  bimodal  resin. The  properties of  bimodal resins are Strongly dependent  on the proportion of  the high molecular  weight  component,  i.e., the low melt  indeX  com ponent. For a Staged reactor System, the proportion of the high  molecular  weight component is  controlled  via  the relative  production  rate in each  reactor.  The  relative produc tion  rate  in each reactor can, in turn, be controlled by a computer  application program, which monitors  the produc tion rate in  the reactors  (measured  by  heat  balance)  and  then manipulates  the ethylene  partial  preSSure in  each  reactor  and catalyst feed rate in order to meet  the production rate, the production  rate Split, and  catalyst  productivity requirements.

35 40  This could account for a terpolymer in each reactor. The It will  be further understood that there may  be a second alpha-olefin  comonomer  in each  reactor  coming  from  a  vent recovery System,  for  example.  In  this  case,  recovered  liquids containing both comonomers are fed into the first reactor and there is carryover from the first reactor to the Second reactor due to the Solubility of  the comonomer  in the resin. molar ratio of C6 to C4  (or other combination of higher alpha-olefin to  lower  alpha-olefin) is preferably no  less than about  5:1 in the first reactor. Any  molar ratio is Satisfactory in the  Second  reactor. In any  case,  the overall molar  ratioS of alpha-olefin to ethylene in each reactor do not change.

50

## DESCRIPTION OF  THE  PREFERRED EMBODIMENT(S)

AS noted, the blend is produced in two staged reactors connected  in  Series  wherein  a  mixture  of  resin and  activated catalyst precursor is transferred from the first reactor to the Second reactor in which  another  copolymer  is prepared  and blends in situ with the copolymer from the first reactor. It will  be  understood  by  those  skilled  in  the art  that  the transfer is effected without  exposing  the mixture to the atmosphere.

55

High speed extrusion bubble stability  is  an important factor  in  blown film  extrusion  processes.  A  blown film extrusion proceSS  is one in which  molten  polymer  is forced through  an  annular  die to form  a  continuous  cylindrical  tube. Outside the die, the tube is blown out to a larger diameter than  the  die  diameter,  cooled by an  air  ring,  and then flattened before wind-up. The ratio of  the final diameter  of the cylindrical tube to the diameter of  the annulus  is called the blow-up  ratio (BUR).  The  combination  of  the extrusion rate, BUR,  and  the speed  with which  the tube is drawn  out determines the final film thickness. The ability to produce thinner films at higher rates of extrusion is governed by many  factors including  the molecular  and  Theological  char acteristics of  the molten  polymer, dependence of  properties on temperature, and  the design of  the air ring.

60

The copolymers produced in  each of the  reactors  are copolymers  of  ethylene  and  at  least  one  alpha-olefin comonomer  having  3 to 8  carbon atoms,  preferably one or two  alpha-olefin  comonomers.  The  alpha-olefins  can  be, for  65 example, propylene,  1-butene,  1-hexene,  4-methyl-1pentene, and 1-octene.

The entire  cylindrical  tube  between  the  die  and  the collapsing frame (where the tube is flattened) is called the 'bubble.' This is a cylindrical bubble in contrast to tradi tionally familiar spherical bubbles in which air, or some other  gas,  is  enveloped  by  a  thin  liquid  film. Here,  air  is  used to  blow a  thin  molten polymer film.  The bubble  looks conical  from  the  outside  because  of  a  change  in  the  diameter until  the  solidification  at  the  frost-line  height  (FLH).

S

Sometimes,  e.g., with  high  density polyethylene,  the  bubble looks like a cylindrical Semi-molten tube with a diameter approximately  equal  to the ring  diameter  before  being  blown out  into a  larger  diameter. Past  the FLH,  however,  the shape does  not  change  from  a  circular  cylindrical  tube of  constant diameter.  Note  that  between  the die and  the FLH  the  bubble is always  Semi-molten.

One  would  like  to  produce  a  final  film  with  close  tolerance in film thickneSS under  Stable conditions of  operation. That is, the shape of the bubble remains the same without any change  over  time. The  highest  extrusion rate and  the  highest wind-up  speed  that  can  be used  without  changing  the shape of  the bubble  provides  the operating  constraints for a given resin  in  a given System (extruder,  air  ring,  cooling air temperature,  etc.). For  example,  at a given  extrusion rate, if one can increase the wind-up speed to make thinner film without  losing  the shape  of  the bubble,  then  the resin  is  said to have good  high Speed  extrusion bubble Stability.

15

Often, the bubble stability within a given extrusion sys tem  is directly related  to the molecular  characteristics  which influence  the  behavior  of  the  bubble. For  example,  it is  easier to  Stretch  chewing gum into  a very thin  thread without breakage than a rubber  band.  A ubber  band  stiffens as it is r Stretched  and,  beyond  a  certain  point,  it will  break.  However, the stiffening  of  the rubber  band  also  gives  it better  stability since it will  be  less sensitive to external disturbances. This  25 is not  the case with  the chewing  gum  Since it deforms  very easily  and  is very  sensitive  to disturbances. In  the  blown  film concept,  one  would  like to have  rubber  band  behavior  as  the bubble is being  blown  and  stretched rather than a chewing gum behavior.  In  this  invention,  the  combination  of a particular  precursor,  in  Situ  blending,  ethylene  partial preSSure, and other defined parameters has been found to provide better high  speed  extrusion  bubble stability, i.e., the film can be drawn at higher wind-up speeds to produce thinner films.

6

range of about 1:1 to about 150:1 and is preferably in the range of  about 10:1 to about 30:1.

The cocatalyst,  generally  a  hydrocarbyl  aluminum cocatalyst,  can  be  represented  by  the formula  R.Al,  (RAIO), or  RAIX  wherein  each  R s  independently  alkyl,  cycloalkyl, i aryl, or  hydrogen;  at  least one R  is hydrocarbyl, and  two  or three  R radicals  can be joined  to  form  a  heterocyclic Structure. Each  R, which  is a hydrocarbyl radical, can  have 1 to 20  carbon atoms, and preferably has 1 to 10 carbon atoms. X  is  a halogen, preferably chlorine, bromine, or iodine. Examples  of  hydrocarbyl  aluminum  compounds  are as  follows:  triisobutylaluminum,  tri-n-hexylaluminum, di-isobutyl-aluminum hydride, dihexylaluminum  dihydride, di-isobutyl-hexylaluminum,  isobutyl  diheXylaluminum, trimethyl-aluminum, triethylaluminum, tripropylaluminum, trii  Sopropylaluminum,  tri-n-butyl  aluminum, trioctylaluminum, tridecylaluminum, tridodecylaluminum, tribe  in Zyl  aluminum, trip  he  nylaluminum, trinaphthylaluminum,  tritolylaluminum,  dibutylaluminum chloride,  diethylaluminum  chloride,  and  ethylaluminum  Ses quichloride. The cocatalyst is preferably added Separately neat or  as  a  Solution  in an  inert  Solvent,  Such  as  isopentane, to the  polymerization reactor  at  the  Same  time  as  the flow  of ethylene is initiated. The cocatalyst  compounds  can  also be used as the activators referred to above.

As noted in U.S. Pat. No. 5,122,494, selectivity control agents  can  be  used  in the polymerization  proceSS  if desired, preferably when the primary olefin is propylene.

The magnesium/titanium based catalyst System can be exemplified  by  the  catalyst  system  described  in  U.S.  Pat.  No. 5,122,494. This System includes a precursor, an activator, and  a  cocatalyst. The  precursor  can  be  Supported  or  unsup ported. The precursor (prior to  activation) is  formed by contacting a magnesium alkoxide, a titanium tetraalkoxide, and  Small  amount  of  a  Solubility enhancing  agent  which  can be  a  species  Such  as  carbon  dioxide,  triethylborate,  a bromide, or a phenolic compound  Selected from the group consisting  of  phenol  and  a phenol  Substituted with  an  alkyl, an alkoxy, a halogen, or a dialkylamino group and  can  be  45 isolated  as  a  solid  either  by  removal  of  solvent  (as  described in U.S. Pat. No. 5,106,806) or by precipitation as a halide complex (as described in  U.S. Pat.  No. 5,066,737). The reaction product can be represented essentially by the for mula MgTiOOR):X  wherein each R  is independently an alkyl  group  having  1 to  4 arbon  atoms,  preferably  ethyl,  and c each X  is independently a halide anion or a monovalent anion of a phenolic compound. X  is preferably chloride or an anion of ortho-cresol or 2,6-di-t-butyl-4-methylphenol. The precursor is partially activated by contacting with an alkylaluminum  halide.  The  alkylaluminum  halide is an  acti Vator compound and can be represented by the formula RATY,  wherein R  is an  alkyl  group  having  1 to 8  carbon atoms, Y  is a halogen Such as chlorine, bromine,  or iodine, preferably  chlorine;  and  n  is 1  or  2.  More  detail  can  be  found in U.S. Patent application  Ser. No.  09/395,924  filed on  Sep. 14, 1999, particularly examples  5 and  7. 40 50 55

AS noted above,  the  precursor can be prepared as  a granular Solid or as a Solution. In those cases where it is desired to Support the Soluble precursor, Silica is the pre ferred  Support. Other  Suitable Supports  are inorganic oxides Such  as  aluminum  phosphate,  alumina,  Silica/alumina mixtures, Silica  modified with an organoaluminum com pound Such as triethylaluminum, and Silica modified with diethyl Zinc.  A  ypical  Support  is a  Solid, particulate,  porous t material  essentially inert to the polymerization.  It is used  as a dry powder  having  an  average  particle size of  about  10  to about 250 microns and preferably about 30 to about 100 microns, a Surface area of at least 200  Square meters per gram and preferably at least about 250  Square meters per gram; and a pore Size of  at least about 100  angstroms  and preferably  at  least  about 200 angstroms.  Generally, the amount  of  support  used  is that which  will  provide about  0.1 to about 1.0 millimole of titanium per  gram  of  Support  and preferably about 0.4 to about 0.9 millimole of  titanium per gram of Support.  Impregnation of the  above  mentioned Soluble  catalyst  precursor  into  a  Silica  Support  can  be  accom plished  by  mixing  the  precursor  Solution  and  Silica gel  in  the electron donor  solvent or other  solvent followed  by  solvent removal under reduced preSSure. When a Support is  not desired, the Soluble catalyst precursor can  be used  in liquid form.

The entire  catalyst System, which includes a partially activated precursor and the cocatalyst, is added  to the first reactor. The catalyst is admixed with the copolymer pro duced  in  the  first reactor,  and  the mixture  is transferred  to  the Second reactor.  Insofar as the catalyst is concerned, only cocatalyst is added to the Second reactor from an outside SOCC.

60

The polymerization in each reactor is, preferably, con ducted  in  the  gas  phase  using  a  continuous  fluidized  process. A  typical fluidized bed  reactor  is described  in U.S. Pat. No. 4,482,687.

Preferred activators include alkylaluminum mono- and dichlorides wherein each alkyl radical has 1 to 6 carbon atoms. Examples of preferred activators are diethylalumi num chloride  (DEAC) and ethylaluminum  dichloride  65  only  a  portion of  the final  product  is made  in the first reactor. (EADC). Other  conventional activators can also be used if desired.  The  molar  ratio  of  activator  to titanium  can  be  in  the A  relatively low melt index (or high molecular weight) copolymer  is prepared  in the first reactor. The  first reactor  is generally Smaller in size than the Second reactor because The mixture of polymer and an active catalyst is usually transferred  from  the first reactor to the Second  reactor  via  an

35

7

interconnecting device  using nitrogen  or Second reactor recycle gas as a transfer medium.

In the high molecular weight (HMW)  reactor:

Because of the low values, instead of melt index, flow indeX is  determined  and those  values  are  used in  this specification.  The  flow index  (I 21.6)  can  be  in  the range of about 0.20 to  about 5.0 grams per  10 minutes, and is preferably in the range of  about 0.25 to about 4  grams  per 10  minutes.  The  molecular  weight of this  polymer is, generally, in the range of  about 250,000  to about 600,000. The density of  the copolymer  can  be in the range of  0.890 to 0.940  gram  per  cubic  centimeter, and  is preferably in the range of  0.900  to 0.935  gram  per  cubic  centimeter.  The  melt flow  ratio (I 21.6/I 2.16)  of  the polymer  can  be  in  the range of  about  20  to about 65, and  is preferably about  22  to about 50.

Melt index (I 2.16) is determined under  ASTM  D-1238, Condition E. It is measured at 190° C. and  2.16 kilograms and reported as  grams  per 10  minutes. Melt  index  (I 5)  can also be  determined  under  ASTM  D-1238,  Condition P. It is measured  at 190° C. and  5  kilograms  and  reported as  grams per 10 minutes. Flow index (I 21.6) is determined under ASTM  D-1238, Condition F. It is measured  at 190° C. and 21.6  kilograms  and reported as grams  per 10  minutes. Melt flow  ratio is the ratio of  flow index  (I 21.6)  to melt  index  (I 2.16 or I 5).

15

25

In the low molecular weight (LMW)  reactor:

A  relatively high melt index (I 2.16) (or low molecular weight)  copolymer  is prepared  in this reactor.  The  high melt index  can  be in the range of  about  80  to about 1000  grams per 10  minutes, and  is preferably in the range of  about 150 to about  900  grams  per  10  minutes.  The  molecular  weight  of the high melt  indeX  copolymer  is, generally, in the range of about 15,000  to about  35,000.  The  density  of  the  copolymer prepared  in this reactor  can  be  in the range  of  0.925  to 0.970 gram  per  cubic  centimeter, and  is preferably in the range of  35 0.928 to 0.965 gram per cubic centimeter. The melt flow ratio  (I  21.6/I  2.16)  of  this  copolymer  can  be  in the range  of about  20  to  about  65,  and  is  preferably  about  22  to about  50.

The blend or final product, as removed from the second reactor,  can  have  a melt  index  (I5)  in the  range  of  about  0.01 to about  2.0  grams  per  10  minutes,  and  preferably  has  a  melt index  in the range of  about  0.05 to about 1.0  grams  per 10 minutes. The  melt flow ratio (I 21.6/I 5) is in the range of about  20  to  about  45,  and  is preferably  in the range of  about 22 to about 42. The average molecular weight of the final product  is, generally,  in the range  of  about  200,000  to about 350,000. The density of the blend can be in the range of 0.915  to 0.958 gram  per  cubic centimeter, and  is preferably in the range of  0.920 to 0.955 gram  per cubic centimeter.

The blend has a  broad molecular weight distribution which  can  be  characterized  as  bimodal.  The  broad  molecular weight  distribution is reflected in an  Mw/Mn  ratio of  about 18 to about  32,  preferably about  20  to about  30. Mw s the i weight  average  molecular  weight,  Mn s the number  average i molecular weight; and the Mw/Mn  ratio can  be referred to as  the  polydispersity  index  (PDI),  which  can  be  viewed  as  a measure  of  the  breadth  of  the  molecular  weight  distribution.

40

45

50

55

8

tinuously fed to the Second reactor.  The final product is continuously removed  from the Second reactor.

In the low melt  index, as reflected in flow index  reactor, i.e.,  the  first  reactor:  The  mole  ratio  of alpha-olefin  to ethylene  can  be  in the range  of  about  0.005:1  to  about  0.4:1, and  is preferably  in  the  range  of  about  0.02:1  to about  0.26:1. The mole ratio of  hydrogen  to ethylene can  be in the range of about 0.0001:1 to about 0.3:1, and is preferably in the range  of about  0.001:1  to  about 0.18:1.  The operating temperature  is  generally  in  the  range  of  about  60° C.  to  about 100° C.  Preferred  operating  temperatures  vary  depending  on the density desired, i.e., lower temperatures for lower  den Sities and  higher temperatures for higher densities.

In the high melt indeX reactor, i.e., the Second reactor:

The mole ratio of  alpha-olefin (optional) to ethylene can be in the  range of about 0.005:1 to  about 0.6:1, and is preferably in the range of  about  0.01:1 to about  0.42:1. The mole ratio of  hydrogen to ethylene can  be in the range of about 1.0:1 to about 3:1, and is preferably in the range of about 1.3:1  to about 2.2:1. The operating temperature is generally in the range of  about 70° C. to about 110° C. As mentioned  above, the temperature is preferably varied with the desired density.

The total reactor  pressure in the Second  reactor is usually higher than that used in the first reactor because of  higher ethylene  partial  pressures  and high  hydrogen/ethylene requirements. The pressure, i.e., the total pressure in each reactor, can  be in the range of  about 200  to about  450  psig and  is preferably  in the  range  of bout  280  to about  400  psig. a The  ethylene  partial  pressure  in  the first reactor  can  be  in the range of  about 10  to about 100  psi and  is preferably in the range of about 20 to about 60 psi. The ethylene partial preSSure in the Second reactor can  be in the range of  about 50  to about 120  psi and  is preferably in the range of  about 60 to about 110 psi. The upper limit of ethylene partial preSSure in the first reactor  and  the ethylene  partial  preSSure in the Second reactor are Set according to the amount of copolymer  it is desired to produce  in  each  of  these reactors, i.e.,  to achieve the Split mentioned above. It is noted that increasing the ethylene partial pressure in the first reactor leads  to an  increase  in  ethylene  partial  pressure  in  the  Second reactor.  Generally,  the  ethylene  partial  preSSure  roughly doubles in the second reactor over the  first  reactor. The balance of the  total preSSure is  provided by alpha-olefin other than ethylene and  an inert gas  Such as nitrogen.

A  typical fluidized bed reactor can be described as fol lows:

The  bed  is usually made  up  of  the  same  granular  resin  that is to be  produced in the reactor. Thus,  during  the course of the  polymerization,  the  bed comprises formed polymer particles, growing polymer  particles, and  catalyst particles fluidized  by  polymerization  and modifying  gaseous  compo nents  introduced  at  a  flow  rate or  Velocity  Sufficient  to cause the particles to Separate  and  act  as  a fluid. The  fluidizing  gas is  made up of the  initial  feed,  make-up feed, and cycle (recycle) gas, i.e.,  comonomers and, if desired, modifiers and/or an  inert carrier gas.

The weight  ratio  of copolymer prepared  in  the  high molecular  weight reactor to copolymer  prepared in the low molecular  weight reactor can  be  in the range of  about  0.8:1 to about  2.3:1, and  is preferably in the range of  about  0.9:1 to about 1.9:1. The  optimum  weight  ratio is about 1.2:1 to about 1.5:1. This is also known  as the split.

60  discharge System. In each vessel, above the bed, there is a The  essential parts of  the reaction System  are the vessels, an  interreactor  transfer  System;  a  vent  recovery  System;  and, in  each  vessel:  a  bed,  a  gas  distribution  plate, inlet  and  outlet piping, a compressor, a cycle gas cooler,  and a product Velocity reduction Zone, and, in the bed, a reaction Zone. Both are above the gas distribution plate.

The magnesium/titanium  based  catalyst  System,  ethylene, alpha-olefin,  and  hydrogen  are continuously  fed  into the first reactor; the polymer/catalyst mixture is continuously trans  65 ferred from  the first reactor  to the Second reactor; ethylene, alpha-olefin, and hydrogen, as well as cocatalyst are con

A  typical fluidized bed reactor is also described in U.S. Pat. No.  4,482,687.

The gaseous feed Streams of ethylene, other gaseous alpha-olefins, and  hydrogen, when  used, are preferably fed to the reactor recycle line as  well  as  liquid alpha-olefins  and

the cocatalyst  Solution. Optionally,  the liquid  cocatalyst  can be fed directly to the fluidized bed. The  partially activated catalyst precursor is preferably injected into the fluidized bed as a  Solid  or a  mineral  oil  slurry.  The cocatalyst completes the activation. The product composition can be varied by changing the  molar ratioS of the  comonomers introduced into the fluidized bed. The product is continu ously discharged in granular or particulate form from the reactor as the bed  level builds up  with  polymerization. The production rate is controlled by adjusting the catalyst feed rate.

The hydrogen:ethylene molar ratio can be adjusted to control average molecular  weights.  The  alpha-olefins (other than ethylene) can  be present in a total amount  of  up  to 15 percent by weight of  the copolymer  and, if used, are pref erably included in the copolymer  in a  total amount  of  about 1 to about 10  percent  by  weight  based  on  the weight  of  the copolymer.

15

Several Steps can be taken, in addition to temperature control, to prevent agglomeration. The product discharge line  between  the reactor  and  the  product  pot  is  often  plugged up with chunks between  intervals  of product  drops. A continuous  purge flow of  nitrogen or reactor  gas  in the line prevents the plugging problem. Also, coating the  reactor Surface with a low Surface energy material is shown  to be beneficial to  slow down the rate  of fouling build up. In  25 addition,  control  of  the  electrostatic  level  in the  bed  prevents Static induced  particle agglomeration.  Static can  be  adjusted to  a Satisfactory level by controlled use of reaction rate, avoidance  of  quick  change  of  gas  composition,  Selective use of  Static-neutralizing  chemicals  and  Surface  passivation  with aluminum alkyls.

It is preferred to control the Static in the reactor System during  Start-up. If  the Static is not  controlled, Static induced layers  of  catalyst  rich  fines  can  form  on  the reactor  Surfaces. These fines may,  in turn, induce localized  hot  spots and  the formation of chunkS. Reactor Surface passivation with an aluminum alkyl minimizes the formation of fines layers. This passivation is accomplished by first building up the aluminum alkyl concentration in the Start-up bed to about 300  to 1000  ppm  based  on  the weight  of  the bed, and then fluidizing the bed with purified nitrogen or ethylene for Several hours. At the end of this passivation period, the reactor  is  purged while  maintaining the  circulation,  the reaction  conditions  are  established,  and  the  reaction  is kicked  off  by  feeding  catalyst into the system. If static still persists, additional  purges  or  Selective use of  Static neutral  45 izing  chemicals  may  become  necessary  to reduce  the level  of Static.

10

Zone to the front heating Zone, the  multiple Sections and Zones  running  from  upstream  to downstream.  If it has  more than one barrel, the barrels are connected in Series. The length  to  diameter  ratio of  each  barrel  is in  the  range  of  about 16:1 to about  30:1.  The  extrusion can  take  place  at  tempera tures in the range of  about 160  to about  270  degrees  C. and is  preferably  carried  out  attemperatures  in  the  range  of  about 180 to about 240  degrees C.

The advantages of the invention are found in the high extrusion  speed  of  the resin  blend;  the high  bubble  strength; and  the  high  bubble  stability.  Thus,  the  blend  can be extruded to thinner gauges at higher  extrusion Speeds, par ticularly gauges  of  0.5 mill or leSS.

In order  to maintain a constant  production rate, increases in  ethylene  partial  preSSure are accompanied  by  decreases  in the amount of  catalyst fed. Consequently, catalyst produc tivity is increased, an additional advantage of  the process.

Conventional  additives, which  can  be introduced  into the blend,  are  exemplified  by  antioxidants,  ultraViolet  absorbers, antistatic agents, pigments, dyes, nucleating agents, fillers, Slip  agents,  fire  retardants,  plasticizers,  processing aids, lubricants, Stabilizers, Smoke inhibitors, Viscosity control agents,  and crosslinking agents,  catalysts,  and boosters, tackifiers, and anti-blocking agents. Aside from the fillers, the additives  can  be  present  in the  blend  in  amounts  of  about 0.1 to about  10  parts  by  weight  of  additive  for  each  100  parts by  weight  of  polymer  blend. Fillers can  be  added  in  amounts up to 200  parts by weight and more for each 100  parts by weight of  the blend.

Patents and  patent application mentioned  in this Specifi cation are incorporated by reference herein.

Molecular  weights  are weight  average molecular  weights unless otherwise noted.

The invention is illustrated by the following  examples.

35

## EXAMPLES  1 to 6

The residence time of  the mixture of  reactants including gaseous and liquid  reactants, catalyst, and resin in each fluidized  bed  can  be  in  the  range  of  bout  1 to about  12  hours a and is preferably in the range of  about 2 to about  5  hours.

40  prevent  peroxide  formation.  Then,  62.5  pounds  of  aluminum The  catalyst  precursor  used  in  example  1 is manufactured in two  steps. In the first step,  390  gallons  of  tetrahydrofuran (THF) is added to a solution preparation vessel to which BHT  (butylated  hydroxytoluene) is added  as  an  inhibitor  to reduced titanium trichloride  TiCl,  or one part TiCl  to 3 parts AlCl  (by weight)  and 150 pounds of magnesium chloride (MgCl) are added. The mixture is heated to  a temperature of  65  to 75  degrees  C.,  and  held  for a  period  of 4 hours to  dissolve.  The Solution  is  filtered  to  remove insolubles. Then, 220  pounds of Silica are charged to the vessel. The  silica is slurried with the solution and  the slurry is  pumped to  a jacketed holding tank  maintained at  a temperature of  35 degrees C.

50

The resin blend can be extruded into film in a conven tional extruder adapted for that  purpose.  Extruders and processes  for  extrusion  are  described  in  U.S.  Pat.  No. 4,814,135; 4,857,600; 5,076,988; and  5,153,382. Examples of  various  extruders, which  can  be  used  in forming  the film are a single Screw type Such as one modified with a blown film die and air ring and continuous take off equipment, a blown  film  extruder,  and  a  slot  cast  extruder.  A  ypical  Single t Screw  type  extruder  can  be  described  as  one  having  a  hopper at its upstream end and a die at its downstream end. The hopper feeds into a barrel, which contains a Screw. The barrel can be smooth, but is preferably grooved. At the downstream  end,  between  the end  of  the Screw  and the die, is a  Screen  pack  and  a  breaker  plate.  The  Screw  portion  of  the extruder is considered to be divided up into three Sections, the feed  Section, the compression  Section, and  the metering Section, and multiple heating Zones from the rear heating

55

The Second  Step involves Spray drying the above slurry. This  is accomplished  by continuously feeding  the slurry to a spray dryer. Hot nitrogen is circulated through  the drying chamber, and  the THF  is evaporated leaving the TiCl/Mg Cl/THF/silica complex as a solid powder. The  solids are then dropped  into a  slurry tank  pre-loaded  with dry mineral oil.  The slurry  tank is  then rolled  for several  hours to produce the catalyst used  in example 1. It is Similar to the catalysts described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,376,062 and  4.293, 673.

60

65

A  magnesium/titanium alkoxide precursor,  which is  a Solid reaction product, is prepared according  to illustrative embodiment  II from U.S. Pat. No.  5,124,298 carried out  on a  Scale Sufficient to obtain 300  pounds  of  granular  material. Analysis (average  of two runs):  12.3 percent Mg, 7.55 percent Ti, 60.3 percent OEt,  0.93 percent o-cresol (Cl= 11.5 percent by  charge balance).

The  activated  precursor  used  in examples  2, 3, 5, and  6  is prepared as follows:

11

To a 10 gallon Stainless Steel reaction/filter vessel are charged 1,892 grams  of  magnesium/titanium alkoxide pre cursor  powder  together  with  3.5  kilograms  of  hexane.  Then, a  solution of  3.9  kilograms  of  SiCl,  and  713  grams  of  TiCl in 6.6 kilograms of  toluene is charged  at Such a rate (15 to 20  minutes) as to keep  the  reaction temperature between  25 and 30  degrees C.  The  slurry is then  stirred for 30  minutes and filtered through an internal filter plate. The solids are washed by re-slurrying in  15 kilograms of a 50/50 (by weight)  mixture  of  hexane  and  toluene,  and  are then  isolated by  filtration. In  like manner,  the  solids  are  washed  twice  with hexane and  dried  under  moving  nitrogen. The  yield  is 2,472 grams  of  yellow  powder.  Analysis: 10.7  weight  percent  Mg, 9.82 weight percent Ti; and 36.2 weight percent Cl.

The vessel is recharged with 1,302 grams  of the yellow powder  and  5  kilograms  of  hexane.  Then,  7.291  grams  of  25 weight percent ethylaluminum dichloride  in  toluene  are added  at Such a rate (15 minutes)  as  to keep  the temperature between  25  and  30  degrees  C.  Then,  1,175  grams  of  1 Molar BC1 in heptane are added all at once. After stirring for 30 minutes  at  25  degrees  C.,  the  slurry  is  filtered.  The  solids  are washed once with 50/50 (by weight) hexane/toluene, then twice with hexane and  dried  overnight under moving  nitro gen as  above. The yield is  1068 grams of dark brown powder. Analysis:  10.7 weight percent Mg; 9.62 weight percent  Ti; 2.38  weight  percent  Al; and  56.7  weight  percent Cl. A  polymerization Sample is prepared by Slurrying 1.0 kilogram of the powder  in 2.57 kilograms of  mineral oil.

Example 1 is a comparative example and examples  2, 3, 5,  and  6  represent  high  density and  medium  density  embodi ments  of  the invention. Example  4  compares  the examples 2 and  3 resins with the example 1 resin.

## EXAMPLE  1.

About  85  pounds  of  polyethylene having  a melt  index of 1.0 gram per 10 minutes and a density of 0.920 gram per cubic centimeter made with the  example 1  catalyst  are charged  to a first reactor  as  a  Seedbed.  About  120  pounds  of polyethylene  having  a  flow  index  of  0.5  gram  per  10  minutes and  a density of  0.940  gram  per  cubic  centimeter  made  with the example 1 catalyst are charged  to a  Second  reactor as a seed bed. Comonomers are ethylene and 1-hexene. Both reactors are then purged with high purity  nitrogen at 80 degrees C. for Several hours until the moisture content is below 10 ppm. Then, about 1500 cubic centimeters of 5 weight percent triethylaluminum (TEAL) in isopentane is charged to each reactor and circulated for a period of 4 hours. TEAL  acts as  a moisture Scavenger. The  reactors are then given 2 high preSSure purges with nitrogen, and the conditions  set  forth  in  Table  I are  established  in  each  reactor:

TABLE  I

| reactor                   | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|---------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| temperature (C.)          | 85              | 110              |
| pressure (psia)           | 3OO             | 345              |
| C2 partial pressure (psi) | 25              | 70               |
| H2/C2 molar ratio         | O.O4            | 18O              |
| C6,C2 molar ratio         | 0.027           | O.OO75           |
| isopentane (mol%)         | 12              |                  |
| gas velocity (ft/sec)     | 1.75            | 1.70             |

15

25

35

40

45

50

55

60

Approximately 225  cubic  centimeters per hour of 5 weight percent TEAL in  isopentane  are  fed to  the  first reactor and 130 cubic centimeters per hour of 5 weight percent  TEAL  in isopentane are fed  to the Second  reactor to Serve as cocatalyst. Then, the example 1  catalyst feed is  65 initiated at the rate of  7.5 cubic centimeters  per  hour  using a slurry catalyst feeder. The  ethylene partial pressure in the

12

first reactor is manipulated to result in a production rate of 30 pounds per hour of resin. The H2/C2 molar ratio and C6/C2 molar ratio are manipulated in the first reactor to result in a resin with a flow index of  0.25 to 0.50  decigram per minute and  a density of  0.927 to 0.930  gram  per cubic centimeter. The  Split in the resin exiting  the Second reactor, i.e.,  the  final product, is 60/40 (weight percent), i.e.,  60 percent high molecular weight resin and 40 percent low molecular weight resin. This is accomplished by manipu lating the production rate  of resin in the Second reactor, which is, in turn, accomplished by adjusting the ethylene partial  pressure.  The  melt  index  of  the final  product  is about 800  grams  per  10  minutes  and  the density  is about  0.963  per cubic  centimeter.  At  a  total  production  rate of  50  pounds  per hour (HMW+LMW),  a total of 1100 pounds of resin are produced. The  bulk  resin properties are set forth in Table II as follows. The  bimodal  product  properties  are given in the Second reactor column.

TABLE  II

| reactor                                                                                            | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| flow index (g/10 min) average flow index (g/10 min) density (g/cc) average density melt flow ratio | O.25 to OSO     | 6.50 to 10.0     |
|                                                                                                    | O.43            | 6.7              |
|                                                                                                    | O.928 to O.932  | 0.946 to 0.950   |
|                                                                                                    | O.9298          | O.9476           |
|                                                                                                    |                 | 21.5             |

Note: In all of  the Tables, melt flow ratios are ratios of  I21 to I5.

## EXAMPLE  2

The  reactor  conditions  are  set  forth  in  Table  III as  follows:

TABLE  III

| reactor                                                                                                                                                         | first reactor                   | second reactor                |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| temperature (C.) pressure (psia) C2 partial pressure (psi) H2/C2 molar ratio C6,C2 molar ratio isopentane (mol%) gas velocity (ft/sec) production rate (Ibs/hr) | 8O 3OO 38 O.O2 O.O21 1O 1.75 25 | 1OO 345 70 18O O.OO75 1.70 18 |

The Table  IV results  are  approximately  the  same as recited above  for  example  1.  Thus,  the  low  molecular  weight made  in  the  Second  reactor  has  a  melt  index  of  800 rams  per g 10  minutes  and  a  density  of  0.960  gram  per  cubic  centimeter. Approximately 600  pounds  of  resin are produced.  The  Split is 58.5/41.5. The  bulk  resin properties are set forth in Table IV  as follows. The  bimodal  product  properties are given in the Second reactor column.

TABLE  IV

| reactor                                                                                            | first reactor                          | second reactor                               |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| flow index (g/10 min) average flow index (g/10 min) density (g/cc) average density melt flow ratio | O.25 to OSO O.47 O.928 to O.932 O.9288 | 6.50 to 10.0 6.95 0.946 to 0.950 O.946 26.23 |

More detail  with  respect  to  example 2 conditions  and properties is given in Table V.

13

TABLE  V

| reaction conditions                         | first reactor           | second reactor   |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------|
| temperature(C.)                             | 8O                      | 1OO              |
| pressure (psia)                             | 3OO                     | 345              |
| COOOle                                      | 1-hexene                | 1-hexene         |
| C2 partial                                  | 38                      | 70               |
| pressure(psia) H2/C2 molar                  | O.O2                    | 1.8              |
| ratio C6/C2 molar ratio                     | O.O21                   |                  |
| recycle                                     | 1O                      |                  |
| isopentane                                  |                         |                  |
| (mol%) C2 feed (Ibs/hr)                     |                         | 21               |
| catalyst feed rate (cc/hr)                  |                         |                  |
| 5% TEAL feed rate (cc/hr)                   |                         | 130              |
| total production rate (Ibs/hr)              |                         | 43               |
| production rate for each reactor            | 25                      | 18               |
| (Ibs/hr) titanium split (%)                 | 58.3                    |                  |
| SGV (ft/sec)                                | 1.75                    | 1.7              |
| fluidized bulk density                      | 15.3                    | 13               |
| (Ibs/cu ft) bed weight (Ibs) residence time | 85 3.400                | 12O 2.791        |
| (hrs) catalyst carrier                      | isopentane and nitrogen |                  |
| low index (g/10 min)                        | O.47                    | 6.95             |
| (g/10 min) density(g/cc)                    |                         | O.946            |
| melt index-I5                               | O.9288                  | O.265            |
| melt flow ratio residual Al (ppm)           | 270                     | 26.23            |
|                                             |                         | 250              |
| residual titanium (ppm) AlfT molar ratio    | 17.5                    | 10.2 40          |
| settled bulk                                | 28                      |                  |
| density                                     | 18.5                    | 20.5             |
| size(inch) fines less than 120 mesh (wt %)  |                         |                  |

## EXAMPLE  3

The  reactor  conditions  are  set  forth  in  Table  VI  as  follows:

TABLE  VI

| reactor                   | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|---------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| temperature (C.)          | 70              | 1OO 400          |
| pressure (psia)           | 3OO             |                  |
| C2 partial pressure (psi) | 51              | 94               |
| H2/C2 molar ratio         | 0.055           | 1.65             |
| C6,C2 molar ratio         | O.O16           | O.OOSO           |
| isopentane (mol%)         | 14              |                  |
| gas velocity (ft/sec)     | 1.7             | 1.65             |
| production rate           | 3O              | 2O               |

1O

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

The bulk resin  properties are  set  forth  in  Table VII as  65 follows. The bimodal product properties are given in the Second reactor column.

14

TABLE  VII

| reactor                                                                                            | first reactor                          | second reactor                            |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| flow index (g/10 min) average flow index (g/10 min) density (g/cc) average density melt flow ratio | O.25 to OSO O.39 O.928 to O.932 0.9297 | 6.50 to 10.0 7.01 0.946 to 0.950 O.947 28 |

More  detail with respect to the conditions and  properties for example 3  are given in Table VIII

TABLE  VIII

| reaction conditions                      | first reactor           | second reactor   |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------|
| temperature(C.)                          | 70                      | 1OO              |
| pressure (psia)                          | 3OO                     | 400              |
| COOOC                                    | 1-hexene                | 1-hexene         |
| C2 partial pressure(psia)                | 51                      | 94               |
| H2/C2 molarratio                         | 0.055                   | 1.6              |
| C6,C2molar ratio                         | O.O16                   | O.OOS            |
| recycle isopentane                       | 14.1                    | 2                |
| (mol%)                                   |                         |                  |
| C2 feed (1bs/hr)                         | 24                      | 24               |
| catalyst feed rate (cc/hr)               | 9                       |                  |
| 5% TEAL feed rate (cc/hr)                | 330                     | 150              |
| otal production                          |                         | 50               |
| rate (Ibs/hr)                            |                         |                  |
| production rate for each reactor(Ibs/hr) | 3O                      | 2O               |
| itanium split (%)                        | 58.4                    |                  |
| SGV (ft/sec)                             | 1.7                     | 1.65             |
| bed weight (Ibs)                         | 8O                      | 12O              |
| residence time(hrs)                      | 2.667                   | 2.400            |
| ap blowback                              | nitrogen                | nitrogen         |
| catalyst carrier                         | isopentane and nitrogen |                  |
| low index(g/10 min)                      | O.39                    | 7.01             |
| density(g/cc)                            | 0.9297                  | O.947            |
| residual Al (ppm)                        | 18O                     | 150              |
| residual                                 | 7.7                     | 4.5              |
| itanium(ppm)                             |                         |                  |
| AlfTimolar ratio                         | 28                      | 40               |
| settled bulk density(Ibs/cu ft)          | 22.8                    | 26               |
| average particle size(inch)              | O.O35                   | O.O31            |
| ines less than 120 mesh                  | 1.OO                    | 1.50             |

Approximately 1500  pounds  of  resin are produced  in  each of  examples 1 to 3.

## EXAMPLE  4.

Although  the reactor  conditions used  in the examples  are Somewhat  different, the gas  composition  is adjusted  So  as  to make products with Similar bulk properties. The product evaluations of the  resins produced in examples 2 and 3, however, result  in  films,  which are  Superior to  the  film produced from the resin of  example 1.

Samples  of  the three resins are submitted  for  Size Exclu sion  Chromatography (SEC) analysis.  The SEC is  per formed  with  a  WatersTM 150° C.  analyzer  with  trichloroben Zene as Solvent at 140  degrees C. With a broad molecular weight distribution Standard and broad molecular weight distribution calibration method.

Example 1: Mn=13,848 Mw-283,537 PDI-20.47 Examples 2 and  3: Mn=12,179 Mw-333,221 PDI-27.36

15

The  SECs  reveal  that the examples  2  and  3  products  have a  broader molecular  weight  distribution than  the example 1 product. It is noted that the broadening  occurs in the high molecular  weight  component.  This  is considered to be very beneficial for bubble stability.

16

TABLE  IX

The resin Samples  from  examples  1 to 3  are compounded on a LCM-100 line (Long Continuous Mixer/Gear Pump Pelletizing  System  (LCM-100  G)  from  Kobe  Steel, Ltd.  The mixer is fitted with EL-2  type rotors from Same manufac turer. Granular resin and  additives  are fed  at room  tempera ture under controlled oxygen level at feed and vent ports. The unit is typically run at 220  rpm, 10  to 40  percent  gate opening  and mixer  barrel temperature control). Precautions are taken to eliminate the possibility of  tailoring (oxidative degradation)  during the  compounding step.  The com pounded  resin Samples  are then extruded  in a  50  millimeter Alpine  TM film  extruder  having  an  80  millimeter  die and  a 1.0 millimeter die gap, and  evaluated.

1O

15

The  example  1 resin  Sample  runs  at a  maximum  line  Speed of  105  feet  per  minute.  The  bubble  is not  stable  at  higher  line Speeds  and  collapses.  The  dart  impact  Strength  of  this  Sample is measured at 240  grams  on a 1 mil film. The film cannot be down gauged to  0.5  mill  because  of inferior bubble stability. These results verify that the precautions taken to  25 avoid tailoring are adequate.

The examples 2  and  3  resin Samples  demonstrate  signifi cantly  improved film properties. These samples run at a maximum  line Speed  of  240  feet  per  minute.  This  represents a 130  percent increase in bubble stability. The  dart impact Strength of  these Samples  is measured  at 290  grams  on a 1 mil  film.  The  film  is  Strong  enough  to  be  down  gauged  to 0.5 mil, and the dart impact Strength at 0.5 mil is measured at 305 grams. Both Samples result in Similar product proper ties.

30

35

The Film Appearance Rating (FAR) is also very good, ranging from  plus 20  to plus 40, for the examples  2  and 3 resin samples  and  for the MDHMW medium  density, high ( molecular weight) resin  Samples of example  5.  Tensile Strength, Elmendorf tear, and percent elongation are also  40 improved.

## EXAMPLE  5

The catalyst of  examples  2  and  3  is also used  to produce two medium density high molecular weight film products. The reactor  conditions  and  proceSS  control  methodology  are Similar  to that used above  for  examples  2  and  3  except  that adjustments are made in order to produce medium density resins as opposed  to high density resins, and  the results are Similar also.

45

| reaction conditions         | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|-----------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| temperature(C.)             | 70.1            | 84.9             |
| pressure (psia)             | 333             | 376              |
| COOOCS                      | 1-buteme        | 1-butene         |
|                             | 1-hexene        | 1-hexene         |
| C2 partial                  | 36.1            | 85.O             |
| pressure(psia)              |                 |                  |
| H2/C2 molar ratio           | O.042           | 1.79             |
| molar ratio                 |                 |                  |
| C4/C2                       |                 | O.O85            |
| C6/C2                       |                 |                  |
|                             | O.047           |                  |
| molar ratio                 |                 |                  |
| catalyst feed rate (cc/hr)  |                 |                  |
| rate (cc/hr)                |                 |                  |
| 5% TEAL feed                | 123             |                  |
| production rate             |                 | 84 16.8          |
| for each reactor            | 25.1            |                  |
| (Ibs/hr)                    |                 |                  |
| bed weight (Ibs)            | 84.5            | 118.0            |
| fluidized bulk              | 15.3            | 12.8             |
| density                     |                 |                  |
| (Ibs/cu ft)                 |                 |                  |
| bed volume                  | 5.5             | 9.2              |
| (cu ft) residence time      | 3.4             | 2.8              |
| S                           | 4.5             | 18               |
| (Ibs/hr?cu ft)              |                 |                  |
| split (energy               | O.60            | O.40             |
| balance)                    |                 |                  |
| split (Tibalance)           | 0.57            | O.43             |
| low index                   | 2.84            | 12.6             |
| (g/10 min)                  |                 |                  |
| melt index-I5 (g/10 min)    |                 | O.49             |
| melt flow ratio             |                 |                  |
| density(g/cc)               | O.91.65         | O.9316 25.6      |
| residual Al                 | 85.O            | 91.4             |
| (ppm)                       |                 |                  |
| residual                    | 2.84            | 1.61             |
| titanium(ppm)               |                 |                  |
| AlfTimolar ratio            | 53.6            | 101.2            |
| bulk density                | 18.7            |                  |
|                             |                 | 21.5             |
| (Ibs/cu ft)                 |                 |                  |
| average particle size(inch) |                 | 0.027 3.80       |
| C6 extractables (wt %)      |                 |                  |
| fines less than             | O.76            |                  |
| 120 mesh (wt %)             |                 |                  |

50

TABLE  X

The two MDHMW  resin samples also demonstrate sig nificantly improved film properties. These samples  exhibit maximum line  Speeds greater than 325 feet per Second  55 representing  a  greater  than  210 ercent  increase  in  line Speed p over  the  example  1 resin  Sample.  The  dart  impact  Strength of these samples at 0.8 and 0.35 mil are 470 grams and 376 grams, respectively, resulting in a normalized dart impact strength of  599 and 1069  grams, respectively, at 1 mil. 60

## EXAMPLE  6

The following are the conditions and  properties for four runs  in  which  MDHMW  esins are made.  The  catalyst  is the  65 r Same as the one  used  in  examples  2,  3, and  5. See  Tables  IX, X, XI, and XII.

| reaction conditions        | first reactor   | second reactor    |
|----------------------------|-----------------|-------------------|
| temperature(C.)            |                 | 85.O              |
| pressure (psia)            |                 | 38O               |
| COOOCS                     | 1-buteme        | 1-butene 1-hexene |
| C2 partial                 | 1-hexene        |                   |
| pressure(psia) H2/C2 molar | 23.3 O.OO1      | 91.1 1.78         |
| ratio C4/C2 molar ratio    | O.OO1           | O.O89             |
| C6/C2 molar ratio          | O.065           |                   |
| catalyst feed              | 3               |                   |
| rate (cc/hr)               |                 |                   |
| 5% TEAL feed               | 128             | 85                |

rate (cc/hr)

17

TABLE  X-continued

| reaction conditions                     | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| production rate for each reactor        | 25.1            | 19.4             |
| (Ibs/hr)                                |                 |                  |
| bed weight (Ibs)                        | 846             | 117.8            |
| fluidized bulk density                  | 14.9            | 13.2             |
| (Ibs/cu ft)                             |                 |                  |
| bed volume                              | 5.7             | 8.9              |
| (cu ft) residence time (hrs)            | 3.4             | 2.6              |
| STY                                     | 4.4             | 2.2              |
| (Ibs/hr?cu ft) split (energy            | 0.57            | O.43             |
| b S alance) plit (Tibalance)            | O.61            | O.39             |
| ow index                                | 1.06            | 3.7              |
| (g/10 min) melt index-I5                |                 | O.13             |
| (g/10 min) density(g/cc)                | O.9105          | 0.9287           |
| melt flow ratio                         |                 | 28.3             |
| residual Al                             | 81.2            | 98.8             |
| (ppm) residual                          | 2.50            | 1.53             |
| titanium(ppm) AlfT molar ratio          | 57.4            | 115.6            |
| bulk density                            | 18.6            | 21.1             |
| (Ibs/cu ft) average particle size(inch) |                 | 0.027            |
| C6 extractables                         |                 |                  |
| (wt %) fines less than 120 mesh (wt %)  | O.35            | 0.52             |

TABLE  XI

| reaction conditions              | first reactor   | second reactor    |
|----------------------------------|-----------------|-------------------|
| temperature(C.) pressure (psia)  | 7O.O            | 84.9              |
|                                  | 344             | 386               |
| COOOCS                           | 1-buteme        | 1-buteme 1-hexene |
| C2 partial pressure(psia)        | 1-hexene 22.8   | 88.5              |
| H2/C2 molar ratio                |                 | 1.79              |
| C4/C2 molar ratio                |                 |                   |
| C6/C2 molar ratio                |                 |                   |
| catalyst feed rate (cc/hr)       |                 |                   |
| 5% TEAL feed rate (cc/hr)        | 119             | 81                |
| production rate for each reactor | 26.0            | 21.8              |
| (Ibs/hr) bed weight (Ibs)        | 84.3            | 117.8             |
| fluidized bulk density           | 14.8            | 12.7              |
| (Ibs/cu ft) bed volume (cu ft)   | 5.7             | 9.3               |
| residence time                   | 3.2             | 2.5               |
| (hrs) STY                        | 4.6             | 2.4               |
| (Ibs/hr?cu ft) split (energy     | O.54            |                   |
| balance)                         | 0.52            |                   |
| split (Tibalance)                |                 | O.48              |

1O

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

18

TABLE  XI-continued

| reaction conditions                      | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| flow index                               | 2.55            | 8.6              |
| (g/10 min) melt index-I5 (g/10 min)      |                 | O.24             |
| density(g/cc)                            | O.9087          | O.9282           |
| melt flow ratio                          |                 | 36.0             |
| residual Al (ppm)                        | 97.8            | 85.8             |
| residual                                 | 3.18            | 1.64             |
| titanium(ppm) AlfTimolar ratio           | 56.2            | 92.8             |
| bulk density                             | 17.8            | 21.1             |
| (Ibs/cu ft) average particle size (inch) |                 | 0.027            |
| C6 extractables (wt %)                   |                 |                  |
| fines less than 120 mesh (wt %)          | O.14            | O.56             |

TABLE  XII

| reaction conditions                     | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| temperature(C.)                         | 70.1            | 85.O             |
| pressure (psia)                         | 337             | 383              |
| COOOCS                                  | 1-buteme        | 1-butene         |
|                                         | 1-hexene 23.2   | 1-hexene 82.7    |
| C2 partial pressure(psia) H2/C2 molar   | O.O15           | 1.79             |
| ratio C4/C2                             | O.OO2           | O.147            |
| molar ratio C6/C2                       | O.O59           |                  |
| molar ratio catalyst feed rate (cc/hr)  | 3               |                  |
| 5% TEAL feed                            | 119             | 85               |
| rate (cc/hr) production rate            | 26.6            | 20.7             |
| for each reactor (Ibs/hr)               | 84.4            | 117.9            |
| bed weight (Ibs) fluidized bulk         | 14.5            | 12.3             |
| density (Ibs/cu ft) bed volume          | 5.8             | 9.6              |
| (cu ft) residence time                  | 3.2             | 2.5              |
| (hrs) STY                               | 4.6             | 2.2              |
| (Ibs/hr?cu ft) split (energy            | O.56            | 0.44             |
| balance) split (Tibalance)              | O.56            | 0.44             |
| low index                               | 3.51            | 9.4              |
| (g/10 min) melt index-I5                |                 | 0.25             |
| (g/10 min) density(g/cc)                | 0.9097          | 0.9255           |
| melt flow ratio                         |                 | 36.8             |
| residual Al                             | 90.0            | 92.4             |
| (ppm) residual                          | 2.99            | 1.68             |
| titanium(ppm) AlfTimolar ratio          | 53.8            | 98.0             |
| bulk density                            | 18.0            | 20.6             |
| (Ibs/cu ft) average particle size(inch) |                 | 0.027            |
| C6 extractables                         |                 | 4.57             |

19

TABLE  XII-continued

| reaction conditions                    | first reactor   | second reactor   |
|----------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| (wt %) fines less than 120 mesh (wt %) | O.21            | O.53             |

Notes to above Tables:

- 1.  Resin properties for Second reactor: These are theo retical  values based on the  assumption that  the  Second reactor  copolymer  is produced  independently. In  Some  cases the bimodal  resin  properties  are  given,  i.e., the properties of the resin blend.
- 2. Density is measured  by producing a plaque in accor dance with  ASTM  D-1928,  procedure C,  and  then testing  as is via ASTM  D-1505. The density is reported in gram per cubic centimeter.
- 3. production rate (lbS/hr)=the average resin production rate  per  hour  based  on  a  heat  balance  calculation (approximately equal to drum average production rate).
- 4.5%  TEAL=5  weight  percent triethylaluminum and 95 weight  percent isopentane.
- 5. titanium split (%)=residual ppm  Ti in Second reactor resin divided by  residual ppm  Ti  in first reactor resin. This is an indirect measure of  polymer  Split.
- 6. SGV  (ft/sec)=Superficial gas  velocity in the bed.
- 7. The fluidized and  settled bulk  densities of  each of  the resins (not the blend) is given in pounds  per cubic foot.
- 9.  STY Ibs/hr/cu ft)=Space/time/yield.  This  is equal  to  the ( resin production rate divided by  the bed volume.
- 8. tap  blowback=nitrogen  is used  to  purge  (blowback)  the taps to avoid tap pluggage problems.
- 10. Split (energy balance)=production rate in first reactor divided by the  total  production  rate.  The instantaneous production  rate  in  each reactor  is  calculated by  a  heat balance on the reactor.

20

- (3) the ethylene  partial  pressure is in the range of  about 10  to about 100  pounds  per Square inch; and
- (e)  in  the  Second reactor in  which a high melt index copolymer is made:
- (1)  alpha-olefinis,  optionally,  present  in a  ratio of  about 0.005 to about 0.6 mole of  alpha-olefin per mole of ethylene;
- (2) hydrogen is, optionally, present in a ratio of  about 1.0 to about 3.0 moles of hydrogen per mole of ethylene, and
- (3) the ethylene  partial  pressure is in the range of  about 50  to about 120  pounds  per Square inch; and
- (f) additional hydrocarbyl aluminum cocatalyst is intro duced  into the Second  reactor  in  an  amount  Sufficient  to restore the level of  activity of  the catalyst transferred from  the first reactor  to about  the  initial level  of  activity in the first reactor.

15

20

- 25  of  phenol  and  a phenol  Substituted with  an  alkyl, an  alkoxy, 3. The  process defined in claim 1 wherein the solubility enhancing  agent  is  carbon  dioxide,  triethylborate,  a  bromide, or a phenolic compound  Selected from  the group  consisting a halogen, or a dialkylamino group.
- 2. The process defined in claim 1 wherein the alkylalu minum  halide can  be represented  by  the formula RATY, wherein R  is an  alkyl  group  having  1 to 8  carbon  atoms,  Y is a halogen; and n is 1 or  2.

35

- 12. Dart Drop is determined under  ASTM  D-1709,  pro cedure A.
- 4. The process defined in claim 1 wherein the polymer formed in the first reactor has  a flow index (I 21.6) in the range of  about  0.20  to about  5.0  grams  per 10  minutes  and a  density  in  the  range  of  about  0.890  to  about  0.940  gram  per cubic centimeter and the polymer formed in the Second reactor  has  a melt  index  (I 2.16)  in the range  of  about  80  to about  1000  grams  per  10  minutes  and  a  density in the range of  about  0.925  to  about  0.970  gram  per  cubic  centimeter,  the weight  ratio  of first  reactor  polymer to  Second reactor polymer  being  in the range of  about 0.8:1 to about 2.3:1.
- 13. Line  Speed  is the take off  speed  from  an  Alpine  TM film line equipped  with a 100 millimeter die and  a 1 millimeter die gap.  The film is produced  in  stalk  mode  with  a  4:1 BUR  40 (blow-up ratio) and a 6 to 8 times die diameter frost line height at about  45  kilograms output rate per hour.

What  is claimed is:

- 1.  A  rocess  for  production  of  a  polyethylene  blend  in  Situ p comprising  contacting  ethylene and  at  least  one  alpha-olefin comonomer  having  3  to 8  carbon atoms  with  a magnesium/ titanium  based  catalyst  System  including  a  partially  activated precursor and a cocatalyst in each of two fluidized bed reactors connected in Series, in the gas phase, under poly merization conditions, with the provisoS that:
- (a) the precursor is formed  by  contacting an alkylalumi num  halide with  a  Solid  reaction  product  prepared  from a magnesium alkoxide, a titanium tetraalkoxide, and  a Solubility enhancing  agent;
- (b) the mixture of  ethylene copolymer matrix and  active catalyst  formed in  the  first  reactor  in  the  Series  is transferred to the Second reactor in the Series,
- (c) other  than  the active catalyst referred  to  in  proviso  (b) and the cocatalyst referred to in proviso (f), no addi tional catalyst is introduced into the Second reactor;
- (d) in the first reactor in which  a low  melt  index  copoly mer  is made:
- (1) alpha-olefin is present in a ratio of  about 0.005 to about  0.4 mole  of  alpha-olefin  per  mole  of  ethylene;
- (2) hydrogen is, optionally, present in a ratio of  about  65 0.0001 to about 0.3 mole of hydrogen per mole of ethylene, and

45

50

55

60

- 5. The process defined in claim 1 wherein the alkylalu minum halide  is  represented by the  formula  RATY, wherein R  is an alkyl group  having  1 to 8  carbon  atoms,  Y is  a halogen, and n is 1 or 2 and the reaction product is represented  by  the formula MgTi(OR)x- wherein  each R is independently an alkyl  group  having  1 to 4  carbon  atoms and  each  X s independently a halide or  a monovalent  anion i of  a phenolic compound.
- 6. The  process defined in claim 1 wherein the blend has a melt index (I 5) in the range of  about 0.01 to about 2.0 grams  per 10  minutes; a melt flow ratio (I 21.6/I 5) in the range of  about  20  to about  45; and  a density in the range of 0.915 to 0.958 gram  per cubic centimeter.
- 7. The  process  defined in claim 1  wherein  a  high density polyethylene blend is produced under the following  condi tions:

in the first reactor:

- (1) the alpha-olefin is 1-hexene and/or 1-butene and  is present  in a  ratio of  about  0.01 to about  0.04  mole  of alpha-olefin per mole of ethylene;
- (2)  hydrogen  is  present in a  ratio of  about  0.01 to about 0.1 mole of  hydrogen  per mole of  ethylene; and
- (3) the ethylene  partial  pressure is in the range of  about 25 to about 70  pounds  per  Square inch; and

in the Second reactor:

- (1) the alpha-olefin is 1-hexene  and/or 1-butene and  is, optionally,  present  in a ratio of  about  0.005  to about 0.05 mole of  alpha-olefin per mole of  ethylene;
- (2) hydrogen  is present in a ratio of  about 1.3 to about 2.2 moles  of  hydrogen per mole of  ethylene; and
- (3) the ethylene  partial  pressure is in the range of  about 50  to about 120  pounds  per  square inch.

21

- 8. The process defined in claim 7  wherein the blend has a  melt  index  (I5)  in  the  range  of bout  0.1 to about  0.6  grams a per 10  minutes; a melt  flow ratio (I 21.6/I 5) in the range  of about  23  to about  30; and  a density in the range of  0.940  to 0.955 gram  per cubic centimeter.
- 9.  The process defined in claim 1 wherein a medium density polyethylene  blend  is produced  under  the following conditions:
- in the first reactor:
- (1) the alpha-olefin is 1-hexene and/or 1-butene and  is present  in a  ratio of  about  0.03  to about  0.08  mole  of alpha-olefin per mole of ethylene;
- (2) hydrogen is present in a ratio of about 0.0009 to about 0.06 mole of  hydrogen  per mole of  ethylene; and
- (3) the  ethylene  partial  pressure  is in  the range of  about 20  to about 60  pounds  per  Square inch; and

in the Second reactor:

- (1) the alpha-olefin is 1-hexene and/or 1-butene and  is present in a ratio of  about  0.05 to about  0.2 mole  of alpha-olefin per mole of ethylene;
- (2) hydrogen  is present in a ratio of  about 1.3 to about 2.2 moles  of  hydrogen  per mole of  ethylene; and
- (3) the  ethylene  partial  pressure  is in  the range of  about 50  to about 120  pounds  per  square inch.

15

25

- 10. The  process  defined in  claim 9 wherein  the blend  has a  melt  index  (I5)  in  the  range  of bout  0.1 to about  0.6  grams a per 10  minutes; a melt  flow ratio (I 21.6/I 5) in the range  of about  23  to about  40; and  a density in the range of  0.918  to 0.940  gram  per cubic centimeter.

30

35

40

45

- 11. A rocess for the production of  a polyethylene blend p in  Situ  wherein the polymer formed in  a first  reactor is comprised  of  a  copolymer  of  ethylene  and  1-hexene  and  has a flow index  (I 21.6) in the range of  about 0.2 to about  5.0 grams  per 10 minutes and a density in the range of about 0.890 to about 0.940 gram per cubic centimeter and the polymer formed in  a Second reactor  is  comprised of a copolymer  of  ethylene and 1-butene or 1-hexene and  has a melt index (I 2.16) in the range of  about  80  to about 1000 grams  per 10 minutes and a density in the range of about 0.925  to about  0.970  gram  per  cubic centimeter, the weight ratio  of first  reactor polymer to Second reactor polymer being in the range of  about 0.8:1 to about 2.3:1,
- comprising contacting ethylene and the aforementioned alpha-olefins  with  a magnesium/titanium  based  catalyst System including a partially activated precursor and a cocatalyst in each of two fluidized bed reactors con

22

nected  in  Series, in the  gas  phase,  under  polymerization conditions, with the provisoS that:

- (a) the precursor is formed by contacting an alkylalu minum  halide with a Solid reaction product wherein the alkylaluminum halide is represented by  the for mula RATY,  wherein R  is an alkyl group  having 1 to 8  carbon  atoms,  Y  s a halogen, and n is 1 or  2 i and the reaction product is represented by the for mula MgTi(OR)sX  wherein each R is  indepen dently  an  alkyl  group  having  1 to  4 arbon  atoms  and c each X  is independently a halide or a monovalent anion of a phenolic compound;
- (b)  the  mixture  of ethylene  copolymer matrix and active catalyst  formed  in  the first reactor  in the  Series is transferred to the Second reactor in the Series,
- (c) other than the active catalyst referred to in proviso (b) and the cocatalyst referred to in proviso (f), no additional  catalyst  is  introduced  into  the  Second reactor,
- (d) in  the first  reactor in which  a  low melt index copolymer is made:
- (1)  alpha-olefin  is  present  in  a  ratio of  about  0.005  to about 0.4 mole of  alpha-olefin per mole of  ethyl ene,
- (2) hydrogen  is, optionally,  present  in a  ratio  of  about 0.0001  to about  0.3 mole  of  hydrogen  per  mole  of ethylene, and
- (3) the ethylene partial pressure is in the range of about  10  to  about  100  pounds  per  Square inch; and
- (e) in the Second reactor in which a high melt index copolymer is made:
- (1) alpha-olefin is,  optionally, present in a ratio of about 0.005 to about  0.6 mole  of  alpha-olefin per mole of  ethylene;
- (2) hydrogen,  optional, is present in a ratio of  about 1.0 to about 3.0 moles of hydrogen per mole of ethylene, and
- (3) the ethylene partial pressure is in the range of about  50  to  about  120  pounds  per  Square inch; and
- (f)  additional  hydrocarbyl  aluminum  cocatalyst  is  intro duced  into the Second  reactor  in an  amount  Sufficient to restore the level of  activity of  the catalyst trans ferred  from  the first reactor to about  the initial level of  activity in the first reactor.

k

k

k

k

k