USOO6617405B1

<!-- image -->

## (12)  United  States Patent Jorgensen

## (54) PROCESS  FOR  THE  PREPARATION  OF POLYETHYLENE

(75) Inventor:

Robert  James  Jorgensen, Belle Mead, NJ  (US)

(73)

Assignee:  Union  Carbide  Chemicals &amp;  Plastics Technology Corporation, Danbury, CT (US)

- Subject to any  disclaimer,  the  term  of  this patent is extended or adjusted under 35 U.S.C. 154(b) by  O. davs. (b) by  0  days

(*)  Notice:

(21) Appl. No.: 09/353,207

(22) Filed:

Jul. 14, 1999

(51)

Int. Cl." ..........................  C08F /44; CO8F  210/02; 4

B01J  31/14

(52) U.S. Cl. ................................

526/123.1; 526/1242;

526/153; 526/160; 526/348.6; 526/352;

502/104; 502/106; 502/132

(58) Field of  Search ...........................  526/123.1, 124.2,

526/153, 160,352,  348.6; 502/104, 106,

115, 132

## (56) References Cited

## U.S. PATENT  DOCUMENTS

4,482,687. A

11/1984  Noshay  et al......... 526/125

4,508,842 A

4/1985  Beran et al.  .........

...

502/112

5,290,745 A

3/1994  Jorgensen et al.  ..........  502/109

| 4,482,687.   | 11/1984           | Noshay et al.........   |
|--------------|-------------------|-------------------------|
| 4,508,842    | 4/1985 Beran et   | 526/125 502/112         |
|              | al. ......... ... |                         |

(10)  Patent No.:

US  6,617,405 B1

(45)  Date  of  Patent:

Sep.  9,  2003

5,601,472 A

## 2/1997  Parker ........................  446/475

## FOREIGN PATENT  DOCUMENTS

| EP   | 417996       | 3/1991   |
|------|--------------|----------|
| EP   | 35O170       | 3/1994   |
| EP   | 635521       | 1/1995   |
| EP   | T71820       | 5/1997   |
| EP   | O 771 820 A1 | 5/1997   |
| EP   | T83OO7       | 7/1997   |

7/1997

* cited by  examiner

Primary Examiner Robert D. Harlan

## (57) ABSTRACT

A  process of  polymerizing  ethylene or ethylene and  one or more comonomers in one or more fluidized bed reactors with a  catalyst System comprising  (i) a Supported  or  unsup ported magnesium/titanium  based  precursor in Slurry form, said precursor containing an electron donor;  and (ii)  an activator containing aluminum in an amount Sufficient to essentially complete the activation of the precursor is dis closed. In the process, the precursor and the activator are mixed  prior to introduction into the reactor in at least one mixing  procedure, and then the mixture is contacted again with additional activator to essentially complete activation of  the  precursor.  In  the  method,  the  atomic  ratio of  aluminum to titanium is in the range  of  about  1:1 to about  15:1 and  the mole  ratio  of  activator  to  electron  donor  is  about  1:1 to  about 2:1,  and  no  additional  activator  is introduced  into  the reactor ($

## 6 Claims, No  Drawings

1

## PROCESS FOR  THE  PREPARATION  OF POLYETHYLENE

## TECHNICAL  FIELD

This invention relates to a proceSS  for the preparation of polyethylene with a focus on  catalyst activation.

## BACKGROUND  INFORMATION

Polyethylene has long been prepared with Ziegler-Natta catalyst Systems, which typically include a catalyst precur Sor  made  up  of  transition metal(s)  and  an  electron  donor,  and a cocatalyst. In order to obtain the high level of catalyst activity  essential  to  commercial  polymerization  processes,  it is necessary  to  provide  for  essentially  complete  activation of the precursor.  It  should be noted, however, that catalyst activity in these Systems is also affected by a number of other  variables  including  the  method  of  catalyst  manufacture or  formation, the use of  internal electron  donors,  the  chemi cal  composition  of  the internal electron donor,  and  the total amount of  internal electron donor.

Once the basic catalyst  is  formed, it  is  necessary  to remove internal  electron donor from  the  vicinity  of the active site and (if necessary) chlorinate and/or reduce the valence site  of the active metal.  Electron donor (ED) is complexed or reacted away from the active Site by either activator compound  (defined as an  Al compound which is capable of  reducing  TiCl, to  Ti"  valency;  such  compounds can be generically described as RAIX,  wherein X  is a halogen, typically Cl; n ranges from 1 to 3 with preferred values  ranging  from  1.5  to  3; and  R s  preferably  CH,  H5, i C iCHo, nC.  Ho, nCH,  or nGHz) or by a Lewis acid (typically RMX, wherein  n+m=the  valency of  M;  R  is an alkyl or  alkoxy  or  aryloxy  group;  X  s a  halogen; and  M=B, i Al,  or  Si).  The  formula  of  a  non-activator  Lewis  Acid  can  be RBX, wherein X=0  to  2. It is desirable  to  supply  sufficient activator or Lewis acid to remove at least 90  percent and preferably close to 100  percent of  the ED  compound  from the active site. Due to chemical equilibria, it may be nec essary  to  add  a  greater  than  Stoichiometric  amount of activator compound to electron donor to fully activate the catalyst. Activation can be accomplished by partial activa tion  before  introduction  of  the  precursor  into the reactor  and completion of  the activation in the reactor by means  of  the cocatalyst, or full activation prior to  introduction of the precursor into the reactor.

The disadvantages of  partial activation lie in the require ment  for additional proceSS  StepS  and  equipment  to provide the partially activated  precursor  followed  by  final activation in the reactor,  which  requires  excessive  amounts  of  activator compound, i.e.,  cocatalyst  (typically,  aluminum  alkyl compounds), to be added  to the reactor So that an adequate concentration of  activator compound  is present  at the active polymerization site. AS noted above, the function of this activator compound  is to extract electron donor  compound from the potential active site and to activate the active site either  by  alkylation  (if  the  active  site is  already  at  the  correct Valence  State)  or  by  reduction  and  alkylation  if  the active  site valence state requires reduction, for example, from  Ti"  to Ti". In addition to being wasteful, this excess activator compound  can cause operational problems  or detriment to the final product.

15

25

35

40

2

Sition;  however, putting large amounts of activator com pound directly  onto  these  catalysts  can  also  result  in deactivation,  catalysts  which  are  hazardous  to handle  due to pyrophoricity, or  catalysts which  have  poor  flow  properties. Some  of  these disadvantages  can  be  addressed  by  dispersing the  catalyst  in  a  carrier  Such  as  an  inert  hydrocarbon; however,  the disadvantage  of  needing  multiple operations  to produce the catalyst and the inability  to adjust the  final catalyst composition to account for variations in monomer quality are Serious limitations for commercial  operation. A further limitation for commercial operation is the need to dilute the catalyst sufficiently with the inert hydrocarbon  to prevent deactivation of  the catalyst due to high concentra tion of  activator compound  in the catalyst Slurry.

The use of  excess  amounts  of  cocatalyst  in Ziegler-Natta catalyzed polymerizations is Standard practice in the art. Typical Al/Ti molar ratios used in prior art processes are usually  greater  than  20:1,  and  many  are in the 50:1  to 100:1 range.  In  the description  of  these  processes,  lower  values  are mentioned, but clearly are not  preferred. In other prior art, very  low  levels  of  added  aluminum  alkyl  ranging  from  0.1:1 to  about  10:1  are  Suggested,  but  the  catalyst  Systems involved  here are devoid  of  electron  donor  type  compounds, and  So are not relevant to the processes  under  discussion in this specification. A  ypical non-ED  System is described in t U.S. Pat. No.  5,077,358.

Prepolymerization  Systems  are also  mentioned  in  the  prior art.  Typical examples of this kind of catalyst System are mentioned  in U.S.  Pat.  Nos.  5,077,358  and  4,990,479.  These Systems  also do not use internal electron donors, and  addi tion of  extra aluminum  alkyl activator component  can lead to  catalyst  productivity  increases to  Such an extent that Severe  operational  instabilities  are  observed.  These  catalysts are typically activated in the prepolymer preparation with low  amounts  of  an aluminum  alkyl  activator  compound  and frequently with the use of  an  external  electron donor. While 'free' aluminum alkyl may  be removed from the prepoly mer prior to use in the  main polymerization reactor, the prepolymer  catalysts are fully activated in the reactor with large exceSS amounts  of  cocatalyst.

45 50  control of  cocatalyst feed rates to avoid reaction runaway 55  constant reaction conditions,  is dramatically effected requir European Patent  Application 783  007  discloses  a  process for production of polyethylene using reduced amounts of aluminum alkyl  feed;  however,  this  disclosure  focuses exclusively on the use of external addition of additional activator  compound, i.e.,  Separate  activator  and catalyst feeds,  and  overall  Al/Timolar  ratios, which  are at  the lower end of the higher ratios recited above for electron donor bearing catalysts. Operating in this mode introduces other Specific  problems,  Such  as  the need  for  exceptionally  precise and agglomerate  formation.  A  further  disadvantage  of 'starved' activator  feed  is that the  hydrogen  response  of  the catalyst,  i.e. the  relative  hydrogen:ethylene  mole  ratio required to achieve a given molecular weight at otherwise ing larger amounts of hydrogen to achieve the same given molecular weight or melt index.

Typical preactivated catalysts are described in U.S. Pat. Nos.  4,482,687;  4,508,842;  and 5,290,745.  Preactivated  65  thus  forming  highly  branched  materials  which  are catalysts of  the prior art can be formulated with sufficient activator compound  to fully activate the precursor compo 60  and  activator  compound  are  added  Separately requires  exces Although good  polymerization activity is achievable by adding external activator compound, the fact that catalyst Sive amounts of activator compound to keep the required amount of activator compound at the desired level at the active polymerization site. ExceSS  activator compound  also can cause formation of oils, can over-activate Some Sites undesirable, and  can,  in the  extreme,  actually cause catalyst activity decreases.

3

## DISCLOSURE  OF  THE  INVENTION

An object of this invention, therefore, is  to provide a proceSS for preparing polyethylene, which overcomes the deficiencies associated with  Separate and/or  excessive addi tion of  cocatalyst  aluminum  alkyl. Other  objects  and  advan tages will become apparent hereinafter.

According to the present invention, Such a process has been  discovered.  The  process  entails  contacting  ethylene  per Se or  ethylene and  one  or  more  comonomers  in one  or  more fluidized  bed reactors,  under polymerization  conditions, with a  catalyst System comprising  (i) a Supported or  unsup ported magnesium/titanium  based  precursor in Slurry form, said precursor containing an electron donor; and (ii)  an activator in an amount  Sufficient to complete the activation of  the  precursor.  The  invention  lies  in  an  improvement  to  this process comprising

- (A) mixing  the precursor and  the activator prior to intro duction into the reactor in two  or three Steps, the last Step being a topping-off Step in  which activation is completed;
- (B) maintaining  the mixture  from  Step  (A)  in Slurry form; and
- (C) introducing  the mixture  from  Step  (B)  into the reactor with the following provisos:
- (I) the atomic ratio of aluminum to titanium is in the range of  about 1:1 to about 15:1 and  the mole ratio of  activator to electron donor is about 1:1 to about 2:1;
- (II)  the  activator  is  one compound or a  sequential mixture of  two  different compounds,
- (III) each activator compound  has the formula Al(R) Xs wherein each R  is independently a saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon radical having  1 to 14  carbon atoms,  each  X  s independently  chlorine,  bromine,  or i iodine, and n is 1 to 3,

35

- (IV) the activation of  the precursor  is essentially com pleted  prior  to the introduction of  the precursor  into the reactor; and
- (V)  no  additional  activator  is  introduced  into  the  reactor (S).

## DESCRIPTION OF  THE  PREFERRED EMBODIMENT(S)

The gaseous materials used in the process can be intro duced  into the reactors via a recycle gas. The  recycle gas  is defined as a mixture of gases including ethylene per Se or ethylene and one or more alpha-olefins, preferably one or two alpha-olefins, as comonomers and, optionally, one or more inert gases Such as nitrogen (to make up the desired reactor pressure), inert hydrocarbons, and hydrogen. The alpha-olefins  can be,  for  example, propylene,  1-butene, 1-hexene, 4-methyl-1-pentene,  and  1-octene.  The alpha preferably, 3  to 8  carbon  atoms.  The  recycle gas  can  also  be referred to as the inlet gas  or cycle gas.

40

45

4

inert, high Viscosity fluid, e.g., a moderately high  Viscosity mineral oil,  to  allow efficient  blending of the  activator compound.

- A  typical magnesium/titanium  based  catalyst System  can be described as follows:

The  precursor  can  have the formula  MgTiOR).X(ED), wherein R  is an aliphatic or aromatic hydrocarbon radical having 1  to  14 carbon atoms or COR' wherein R' is an aliphatic or aromatic hydrocarbon radical having 1 to 14 carbon atoms; each OR  group is the same  or  different; X  s i independently chlorine,  bromine  or  iodine, ED  is  an  electron donor; d  is 0.5 to 56; e is 0, 1, or 2; f  is 2  to 116; and  g  is 1.5d+2. It is prepared  from  a titanium compound,  a magne Sium  compound,  and  an  electron  donor.  Titanium compounds,  which  are useful  in preparing  these precursors, have the formula Ti(OR),  X, wherein R, X, and e are as defined above, h is an integer from 1 to 4, and  e--h is 3  or 4.  Some  specific  examples  of  titanium  compounds  are  TiCl, TiCl, Ti(OCH)  Br; Ti(OCH)Cl; and Ti(OCOCH) Cls. TiCl and  TiCl, are preferred  compounds.  The magne sium  compounds  include magnesium  halides  Such  as  MgCl, MgBr,  and Mg2.  Anhydrous MgCl2 is a preferred com pound. About 0.5 to about 56, and preferably about 1 to about  10, moles  of  the magnesium  compounds  are used  per mole of  titanium compound.

The electron donor is an organic Lewis base, liquid at temperatures  in the range  of  about  0  degrees  C.  to  about  200 degrees C., in which the  magnesium and titanium com pounds  are Soluble. The  electron  donor  can  be  an  alkyl  ester of an aliphatic or aromatic carboxylic acid,  an aliphatic ketone, an aliphatic amine, an aliphatic alcohol, an  alkyl or cycloalkyl ether, or mixtures thereof, each electron donor having  2  to 20  carbon  atoms.  Among  these electron donors, the preferred are alkyl and  cycloalkyl  ethers having  2  to 20 carbon atoms, dialkyl, diaryl, and  alkylaryl  ketones  having 3 to 20  carbon atoms, and alkyl, alkoxy, and alkylalkoxy esters of alkyl and aryl carboxylic acids having 2 to 20 carbon atoms. The  most  preferred  electron donor  is tetrahy drofuran. Other examples of Suitable electron donors are methyl formate, ethyl acetate, butyl acetate,  ethyl ether, dioxane, di-n-propyl  ether, dibutyl  ether,  ethanol,  1-butanol, ethyl  formate,  methyl  acetate,  ethyl  anisate,  ethylene carbonate, tetrahydropyran, and ethyl propionate. Alcohol containing electron donors which react with the transition metal halide compounds are not preferred.

50

While an excess of electron donor is  used initially  to provide  the  reaction  product of titanium  compound and electron  donor,  the reaction product  finally contains about  1 to about 20 moles of electron donor per mole of titanium compound and preferably about 1  to  about 10 moles of electron donor  per mole of  titanium compound.

olefins usually have no more than 12 carbon atoms, and  55  formula  RBX,  where n  is  0  to  2) are typical Lewis  acids, The  catalyst  system  can  be  exemplified  by  one  where the precursor  is formed  by  Spray  drying  and  used  in  Slurry  form. Such a catalyst precursor, for example, contains titanium,  60  can be one compound or a mixture of two different com magnesium, and an electron  donor,  and,  optionally,  an aluminum  halide. The  precursor  is introduced  into a hydro carbon medium  Such  as mineral oil to  provide a  slurry. This spray dried  catalyst is described  in U.S. Pat. No.  5,290,745. Other processes are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,601,742  65  iodine, and  n  is 1 to 3. Examples  of  the R  radical are methyl, and 4,482,687. In whichever manner  the catalyst precursor is  produced, the precursor is preferably Suspended in an The activators  that  can  be  used in  the  invention  are compounds of the formula RAIX.  Compounds of the ( which are not activator compounds, but are useful in the instant invention. The activator/Lewis acid compounds  are added preferably in the same inert diluent as the catalyst precursor. The  precursor  activator used in the pre-activation pounds. Each  compound  can have the formula  (R)AIX, wherein  each  R s independently  a  Saturated  aliphatic  hydro i carbon radical having 1 to 14  carbon atoms; each X  is a halogen, preferably  independently  chlorine,  bromine, or ethyl, n-butyl, isobutyl, n-hexyl and n-octyl. Preferred acti vators  include  diethyl  aluminum  chloride,  triethyl

15

25

S

aluminum,  tri-n-hexyl  aluminum, dimethyl aluminum chloride, and tri-n-octyl aluminum. Particularly preferred activators are: a  Sequential mixture of  tri-n-hexylaluminum and diethylaluminum chloride; a Sequential mixture of tri ethylaluminum and  diethylaluminum chloride; a Sequential mixture  of  diethylaluminum  chloride  and  tri-nheXylaluminum; a Sequential mixture of diethylaluminum chloride and  triethylaluminum; and  either  diethyl  aluminum chloride or tri-n-hexyl aluminum.

In the Sequential mixture, it is preferred to have the first precursor  activator  (Activator 1)  of  the  formula  AlR and  the Second precursor activator (Activator 2) of formula Al(R) Xs, wherein R,  X,  and  n are the same  as  above.  Preferred mole ratioS of  Activator 2 to Activator 1 range from about 1:1 to about 6:1.

The activators can also be represented by the formulas RA1 or RAIX wherein each R is independently alkyl, cycloalkyl, aryl, or  hydrogen;  at least one R  is hydrocarbyl, and two or  three  R radicals  can be joined  to  form  a heterocyclic  structure.  Each  R, which is  a  hydrocarbyl radical, can  have 1 to 20  carbon  atoms, and  preferably has 1 to 10  carbon atoms. X  is a halogen, preferably chlorine, bromine, or iodine.

Examples of  hydrocarbyl aluminum activators, in addi tion  to  those  mentioned  above,  are  as  follows:  tri isobutylaluminum,  di-isobutyl-aluminum  hydride,  dihexyla luminum hydride,  di-isobutyl-hexylaluminum,  isobutyl diheXylaluminum, trimethylaluminum, tripropylaluminum, trii  Sopropylaluminum,  tri-n-butyl  aluminum, tridecylaluminum,  tridodecylaluminum,  tribenzylaluminum, trip  he  nylaluminum, trinaphthylaluminum, tritolylaluminum,  isoprenylaluminum,  dibutylaluminum chloride, diisobutylaluminum chloride, and  ethylaluminum SeSquichloride.

15

25

Essentially complete  activation of  the precursor  is carried out  prior  to the introduction  of  the  precursor  into the reactor. Depending  on  Specific chemical  equilibria, the total amount of  activator can range from about 1 mole of activator per mole of electron donor to about 2 moles of activator per mole of electron  donor. This ratio  also  applies to  each activator when  two  activators  are used,  but  the total amount of  activator(s) will not be in excess  of  this ratio. It will be understood  that  after  this activation, no  additional  activators are added  to the reactor(s).

35

40

45

In a preferred mode  (Sometimes  referred to as  an in-line reduction  System), the precursor  is introduced into a hydro carbon Solvent slurry feed tank; the Slurry then passes to a Static mixer  immediately downstream of an activator injec tion port where the slurry is mixed  with the activator; then  50 the  mixture passes to a Second Static  mixer immediately downstream of  a Second  activator injection port where it is mixed with the Second activator. The Second activator is optional, but  preferred. The mixture then passes to another mixer, preferably of  the same kind, where it is topped-off  55 with a Small amount of activator Sufficient to  complete activation  of the  precursor,  i.e.,  an amount Sufficient  to alkylate the active  site and  promote  polymerization.  A  mall S additional  amount  may  also  be  included  to  counteract  impu rities  found in  the  polymerization System; however, this amount is inclusive in the overall Al:Ti atomic ratio, i.e., about 1:1 to about 15:1,  preferably about 1:1 to about 10:1, and is not in excess of  that ratio. 60

6

The 32 element mixer (overall length is 24.75 inch) will have a relatively low pressure drop while Still  providing intimate  mixing of the  fluid  elements. The Static  mixer element is preferably located downstream of the injection point of  alkyl reducing  agent  to the precursor Slurry. There is no requirement that the mixer  element  be  within a  certain minimum  distance of  the mix  point; however,  any distance from  a  few  inches  to  a  few  feet  may  be  acceptable  depending on the  overall System layout and dimensions. The Static mixer element may be jacketed or not. In any case, the System should, at a minimum,  be insulated to prevent  heat loSS  to  the  environment.  Acceptable mixing  can  be  provided by a 2 foot (32 element) Kenics  TM static mixer. This low energy mixer  functions  by  constantly dividing  the flow and reversing  flow  directions  in  a  circular  pattern  in  the  direction of  the flow in the tube associated  with  the mixer. Depending on the activator used, Some reaction time may  be required for the reaction of  the activator with the catalyst precursor. This is  conveniently  done using a  residence  time Zone, which can consist either of an additional length of slurry feed pipe  or an essentially  plug flow holding vessel. A residence time Zone  can  be  used  for  both  activators,  for  only one or  for  neither, depending  entirely on  the rate of  reaction between activator and  catalyst precursor. See discussion of residence time pots below. The entire  mixture, after the topping-off  Step, is then introduced into the reactor, usually at the same time as the flow of  ethylene is initiated.

It is noted  that due  to the high  viscosity  of  the slurry, heat transfer is relatively poor  (the Reynolds  number  is in the 1 to 10  range). Degradation  can  begin  to occur  at temperatures higher than  60 degrees  C. Thus, activation  is  normally effected at  temperatures  in the range  of  about  10  to  about  60 degrees  C.,  preferably  about  30  to  about  45  degrees  C.  In  any case, good  mixing  is needed  to maintain constant tempera tures and  allow  for  completion  of  the reaction in  view  of  the prevalent low mass transfer coefficients in high Viscosity Systems. Intense high  energy  input  mixing,  mixing  by  injec tion into a flowing  Stream, and  mixing  by diffusion are not recommended.

To  assure  a  uniform  final  catalyst  precursor,  it is important that  the flow  through  the mixing  devices  be  as close to  plug flow as possible. In addition, Some of  the reactions require finite amounts  of  time to proceed  to completion  So  it is also necessary to provide residence time in the System.  Although this can be accomplished by use of long loops of pipe or tubing,  the  risk  of catalyst precursor Settling out during unavoidable outages in catalyst feed and the high preSSure drop that this  will cause  makes this highly  impractical. Instead, the process  of  the  invention  is  preferably  carried  out utilizing residence time  pots  designed  to promote  plug  flow while retaining the catalyst Slurry in Suspension.

The design of  the residence time pot is such that it will promote uniform (or close to uniform) residence times as well as constant temperature. Since plug flow is desired, designs which  promote  back mixing  are definitely not pre ferred. Although  Some  back mixing will naturally occur in tubing  lines  (due  to  Velocity  gradients-a  natural  consequence of  being  totally in laminar  flow), this is of  relatively minor impact.  Axial  mixing  in  the  residence  time  pots  is  minimized by maintaining  a high aspect ratio  a preferred L/D  (length to diameter  ratio) of  about 10  to about 15).  This  results in a low velocity in the residence time pot and minimal back mixing  due to Velocity gradients in laminar flow.

The  static mixer  element  is  preferably mounted  vertically to prevent Solids accumulation in the mixer. It makes no  65  tion  Section  from the  residence  time pot to  the  Smaller difference which  direction the flow is going,  however.  A 2 3 element  Static mixer  in 72 inch  tube  size is  highly  efficacious. Some homogenization of the slurry occurs at the transi diameter feed lines. Additional radial mixing is preferably provided by Small impellers, which are located near the

7

bottom of the residence time pot. The impeller promotes Some radial  mixing, but mainly assures that  the bottom Section of the residence time pot does not experience SuS pended  solid buildup.

After activator has been added to the catalyst precursor Slurry in one  or  two  steps, additional  activator is added  as  a last  step  prior  to  entry  into  the  reactor.  Preferably, this addition  occurs  within  30  minutes  and  preferably  within  less than 15 minutes  of  actual injection of  the catalyst precursor Slurry into the reactor. The  activator  can  be  in  Solution in an inert  Solvent  (Such  as  a  high  Viscosity  fluid  carrier  or  a  lower Viscosity  Solvent)  or  added  as  pure  component.  It is  essential that a mixer, preferably an additional Static mixer  element, be  located immediately downstream  of  the addition  point  of the additional  activator. It  is also important  to  keep  the  Slurry flowing  to assure  that no  plugs  form  in the  catalyst  feed  line. Additional  activator  is  fed  to  provide  for  sufficient  activation of  the catalyst plus a Small additional amount to Scavenge impurities  in  the  polymerization reactor.  The  total  amount  of this additional 'topping off  activator can be about 0.1 to about  75  percent  by  mol  of  the total amount  of  the activator used  for  the  activation  of  the  precursor.  Addition  of  all of  the activator to the catalyst precursor eliminates mass transfer problems,  which  would  prevent the activator from  reaching the catalyst precursor  if  Separate addition to the reactor was practiced. This  practice leads to extremely efficient utiliza tion of  activator and  improved  polymer  product  properties. After completion of the mixing of activator with catalyst precursor, direct injection into the reactor occurs. Means  of feeding a slurry to a gas phase reactor are well  known  and described in the art (see European Patent Application 635 521, for example).

8

15  into the  process.  Catalyst  precursorS  Such  as  those described microns, a Surface area of at least 200  Square meters per gram and preferably at least about 250  Square meters per gram; and a pore Size of  at least about 100  angstroms  and preferably  at  least  about 200 angstroms.  Generally, the amount  of  support  used  is that which  will  provide about  0.1 to about 1.0 millimole of titanium per  gram  of  Support  and preferably about 0.4 to about 0.9 millimole of  titanium per gram of Support.  Impregnation of the  above  mentioned catalyst precursor  into a  Silica Support  can  be  accomplished by mixing the precursor  and  Silica gel in the electron donor solvent  or  other  solvent  followed  by  solvent  removal  under reduced pressure. The resultant Solid catalyst is then con verted  into a  free flowing  Slurry with an  aliphatic hydrocar bon as described above Such that it is pumpable  as a liquid in U.S. Pat. No.  5,290,745  and  European Patent  Application 771 820 are particularly useful in the process of subject invention when placed into a hydrocarbon Slurry  in  the unactivated State.

The  polymerization is conducted  in the gas  phase  using  a continuous fluidized bed  process.

25

The  hydrocarbon  used  for  the formation of  the slurry can be  any  essentially air  and  moisture  free aliphatic or  aromatic hydrocarbon  which  is unreactive  with  the catalyst  precursor, the precursor activator compounds, and the cocatalyst. In practice, Since many  of  the final polymer  products  find end uses  in food  packaging,  aromatic  hydrocarbons  would  not  be a  preferred  slurry  solvent.  The  hydrocarbon  slurry  solvent  is typically chosen  from  hydrogenated  'mineral oils' or naph 40 thenic  oils  of  relatively  high  Viscosity  to  minimize  Settling  of catalyst Solids in  feed tubes and the like,  although, with appropriate  engineering design,  lower Viscosity  Solvents Such as isopentane, hexane, and heptane can be used as Slurry Solvents. These are not particularly preferred due to the  additional complexity  introduced by use of a lower Viscosity  and more easily Settled slurry  as catalyst.  The viscosity  of the  hydrocarbon slurry solvent,  however, is sufficiently  low so  that  the  slurry  can be  conveniently pumped  through  the pre-activation apparatus  and  eventually into the polymerization reactor. Preferred Solvents are ali phatic hydrocarbons with viscosity greater than about 50 centipoises  (cps),  particularly  greater  than  about  100  cps  and less  than  about  5,000  cps. Particularly  preferred  solvents  are napthenic mineral oils  typified by materials Such as the  55 Kaydol  series of  food  grade mineral  oils supplied  by  Witco under the trademark Kaydol(R) 350  and  550. 35 45 50

Melt  index  is  determined  under  ASTM  D-1238,  Condition E. It is measured  at 190° C.  and  2.16  kilograms  and  reported as grams per 10 minutes or decigrams per minute. Flow index  is determined  under  ASTM  D-1238,  Condition  F. It is measured at  190°  C.  and  10 times the  weight used in determining the melt index, and reported as grams per 10 minutes  or  decigrams  per  minute.  Melt  flow ratio is the ratio of  flow index to melt index. The  product, as  removed  from the reactor,  can  have  a  melt  indeX  in the range  of  about  0.02 to  about  300  grams  per  10  minutes,  and  preferably  has  a melt index  in the range of  about  &gt;0.04  to about  50  grams  per 10 minutes. The melt flow ratio is in the range of  about 20  to about  50,  and  is preferably in the range of  about  20  to about 30. The density of the polymer is normally at least 0.900 gram  per  cubic  centimeter,  and  is preferably in the range of 0.915 to 0.960  gram  per  cubic  centimeter. The  bulk  density can  be  in the range  of  about  18  to  about  32  pounds  per  cubic foot,  and  is  preferably  greater  than  22  pounds  per  cubic  foot. The  molecular  weight  distribution of  the  polymer  is reflected in an Mw/Mn of about 3 to about 7. Mw  is the weight average  molecular  weight,  Mn is  the  number average molecular weight; and the Mw/Mn  ratio can  be referred to as the  polydispersity  index,  which is  a  measure  of the breadth of the molecular weight distribution. Mw/Mn  can also  be  related  to MFR, ith  lower  values  of  MFR ndicated w i lower values of Mw/Mn  and a narrower molecular weight distribution.

The transition metal  based  catalyst System including the activated precursor, ethylene, and, optionally, alpha-olefin and  hydrogen are continuously fed into the reactor, and  the final product is continuously removed  from the reactor.

In the reactor:

The  mole  ratio of  alpha-olefin  (if  used)  to  ethylene  can  be in the range  of  about  0.01:1 to about  0.8:1,  and  is  preferably in the range of  about  0.02:1 to about  0.35:1. The  mole  ratio of  hydrogen  (if  used)  to  ethylene  can  be  in  the  range  of  about 0.001:1 to about  2:1, and  is preferably in the range of  about 0.01 to about 0.5:1. Preferred operating temperatures vary depending on the density desired, i.e., lower temperatures for  lower densities  and higher  temperatures  for  higher densities.

material  essentially inert to the polymerization. It is used as  65  in the range of  about 200 to about 500 psig (pounds per The  pressure, i.e., the total  pressure in the reactor, can  be Square inch gauge) and is preferably in the range of  about 280  to about  450  psig. The  ethylene partial pressure can  be

It  is preferred not to use a Support.  However, in those cases  where  it is  desired  to  Support  the  precursor,  Silica is the preferred Support.  Other Suitable  Supports  are  inorganic  60 oxides  Such  as  aluminum  phosphate,  alumina,  Silica/alumina mixtures, Silica  modified with an organoaluminum com pound Such as triethylaluminum, and Silica modified with diethyl  Zinc.  A ypical Support  is a  Solid, particulate,  porous t a dry powder  having  an  average  particle Size of  about  10  to about 250 microns and preferably about 30 to about 100

9

in the range of  about 10  to about  150  psig, and  is preferably in the range of  about  &gt;20  to about 120  psig. The  balance of the total  pressure  is  provided  by  alpha-olefin  (if  used)  and  an inert  gas  Such  as  nitrogen. Other  inert  hydrocarbons,  Such  as an induced condensing agent e.g., isopentane, hexane also contribute to the overall  preSSure in the reactor  according  to their  vapor pressure  under the  temperature  and pressure experienced in the reactor. A ypical fluidized bed reactor t can be described as follows:

The  bed  is  usually  made  up  of  the  same  granular  resin  that is to be  produced in the reactor. Thus,  during  the course of the  polymerization,  the  bed comprises formed polymer particles, growing polymer  particles, and  catalyst particles fluidized  by  polymerization  and  modifying  gaseous  compo nents  introduced  at a  flow  rate or  Velocity  Sufficient  to cause the particles to Separate and  act  as  a  fluid. The  fluidizing  gas is  made up of the  initial  feed, make-up feed, and cycle (recycle) gas, i.e.,  comonomers and, if desired, modifiers and/or an  inert carrier gas.

The essential parts of  the reaction System are the vessel, the bed,  the gas  distribution plate, inlet and  outlet piping, a compressor, cycle gas  cooler, and a product discharge SyS tem.  In  the  vessel,  above  the  bed,  there  is  a  velocity reduction Zone, and, in the bed, a reaction Zone. Both are above the gas distribution plate.

A  typical  fluidized  bed  reactor  is  further  described  in U.S. Pat. No.  4,482,687.

The gaseous feed Streams of ethylene,  other gaseous alpha-olefins  (if  used),  and  hydrogen  (if  used)  are preferably fed to the reactor recycle line as  well  as liquid alpha-olefins (if  used).  The  activated  catalyst  precursor is  preferably injected into the fluidized bed as a Solid or a mineral oil Slurry. The  product composition  can  be varied  by  changing the  molar ratioS  of the  comonomers introduced into  the fluidized bed. The product is continuously discharged in granular  or  particulate form  from  the reactor  as  the  bed  level builds up  with polymerization. The  production rate is con trolled  by  adjusting  the  catalyst  feed  rate and/or  the ethylene partial pressures.

The hydrogen:ethylene  mole ratio  can be adjusted to control average molecular  weights.  The  alpha-olefins (other than ethylene) can  be present in a total amount  of  up  to 15 percent by weight of  the copolymer  and, if used, are pref erably included in the copolymer  in a  total amount  of  about 1 to about 10  percent  by  weight  based  on  the weight  of  the copolymer.

The residence time of  the mixture of  reactants including gaseous and liquid  reactants,  catalyst,  and resin  in  the fluidized  bed  can  be  in  the  range  of  bout  1 to about  12  hours a and is preferably in the range of  about 2 to about  5  hours.

15

25

35

40

45

50

10

divided up into three Sections, the feed Section, the com pression Section,  and the  metering Section, and multiple heating  Zones  from  the rear  heating  Zone  to  the front  heating Zone,  the  multiple Sections  and  Zones  running  from  upstream to downstream.  If  it has  more  than  one  barrel, the  barrels  are connected in Series. The length to diameter ratio of each barrel  is  in  the  range of about 16:1 to  about 30:1. The extrusion can take place at temperatures in the  range of about 160  to about  270  degrees  C.,  and  is preferably  carried out at temperatures in the range of  about 180  to about 240 degrees C.

The  advantages  of  the  invention  are found  in  that  molecu lar weight  distribution can  be narrowed  and  hexane  extract ables can be decreased without a decrease  in hydrogen response and  catalyst activity; there is no rapid increase in reaction rate, which can result in sheeting, chunking, and cessation  of operation;  reduction  of the  cocatalyst,  i.e., activator, requirement; improved proceSS control; the pre cursor is leSS Sensitive to over-reduction; catalyst fines are all active So  they are less likely to Segregate and migrate to the reactor wall to form  sheets, facilitates activator change where  different products are desired; the process  allows for complete activation even where the activator has very low (or nil) vapor pressure Such as tri-n-hexyl aluminum; the process allows the use of  leSS expensive activatorS Such as triethylaluminum and triusobutylaluminum; eliminates the need for Separate cocatalyst feed; although the proceSS is primarily focused on higher molecular weight (and lower levels of  low molecular weight species), narrow molecular weight distribution products for fabrication into film, the process  has broader  application  to  higher  melt  indeX products, typically resins used in injection molding, elimi nates other  forms  of  catalyst premixing,  often a  unit opera tion; and  allows for quick changes of  catalyst by changing relative flow rates of  precursor and  activator.

Conventional  additives, which  can  be introduced  into the resin product, are exemplified by antioxidants, ultraViolet absorbers, pigments, dyes, nucleating agents, fillers,  Slip agents,  fire retardants,  plasticizers,  processing  aids, lubricants, Stabilizers, Smoke inhibitors, Viscosity control agents,  and crosslinking agents,  catalysts,  and boosters, tackifiers, and anti-blocking agents. Aside from the fillers, the additives  can  be  present  in the  blend  in  amounts  of  about 0.1 to about  10  parts  by  weight  of  additive  for  each  100  parts by  weight  of  polymer  blend. Fillers can  be  added  in  amounts up to 200  parts by weight and more for each 100  parts by weight of  the blend.

Patents, patent applications, and other  publications men tioned in this specification are incorporated by reference herein.

The  reactor  can  be  run  in the  condensing  mode,  if  desired. The condensing mode  is described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,543, 399; 4,588,790; and 5,352,749.

Molecular  weights  are weight  average molecular  weights unless otherwise noted.

The invention is illustrated by the following  examples.

The resin can be extruded in  a conventional extruder  55 adapted  for that purpose. Extruders  and  processes  for  extru Sion are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,814,  135; 4,857,600; 5,076,988; and 5,153,382. Examples of various extruders, which  can be used in forming  film are a single Screw type Such  as  one modified with  a  blown  film die and  air ring  and  60  tained  therein,  is  used.  Instead  of  manipulating  the activator/ continuous  take off  equipment,  a  blown  film  extruder, and  a Slot cast extruder. A ypical Single Screw type extruder  can t be described  as  one  having  a  hopper  at its upstream  end  and a die at its downstream  end.  The  hopper  feeds  into a  barrel, which  contains  a  Screw.  At  the  downstream  end,  between  the end  of  the Screw and  the die, is a  Screen  pack  and  a  breaker plate. The  screw  portion of  the extruder  is considered to be 65  which  would  be  at rates  of  about  1 to  3  cubic  centimeters  per EXAMPLES  1 to 4 Examples 1 to 4 are embodiments of the invention. In these examples, a Small  polymerization reaction System, as described in U.S. Pat. No. 5,290,745 and references con electron  donor  ratioS  in an  in-line fashion  as  indicated  in the discussion of the  preferred mode, the partially  activated precursors  are  prepared  in  a  batch  fashion  due  to  the  extreme difficulty encountered  in metering  activator  compound  flows hour.  These  results  are  illustrative  of the  effect  of the invention in manipulating polymer properties in an in-line

11

fashion over a larger range of polymer MFR  (melt flow ratio), hexane extractables, and polymer  bulk density. The Smaller  reaction  System  is  used  illustratively  to  avoid  experi mentation  in large commercial  equipment, which  can result in  large  amounts of off-specification polymer during the experiment.  The results  described below,  however, are directly Scalable  to  large  Scale  commercial  reaction  Systems. Note: ratioS are mole ratioS unless otherwise Stated.

## Catalyst Precursor Preparation

A  titanium trichloride  containing catalyst precursor is prepared in a 1900 liter vessel equipped  with pressure and temperature  controls  and  a  turbine  agitator.  A  nitrogen atmosphere  (less  than  5  ppm  H2O)  is maintained  at  all times. 1480  liters of  anhydrous  tetrahydrofuran  (THF,  the internal electron donor)  containing  less than  40  ppm  H2O  are added to the vessel. The THF  is heated to a temperature of 50 degrees  C., and  1.7  kilograms  of  granular  magnesium  metal (70.9  gram  atoms)  are  added,  followed  by  27.2  kilograms  of titanium tetrachloride (137  mols).  The  magnesium  metal  has a  particle size in the range of  from  0.1 to 4  millimeters.  The titanium  tetrachloride  is  added  over a  period  of about one-half  hour.

The  mixture  is  continuously  agitated.  The  exotherm resulting from the addition of  titanium tetrachloride causes the temperature of  the mixture to rise to approximately 72 degrees  C. Over  a  period  of  about  three hours.  The  tempera ture is held at about 70  degrees C. by  heating  for approxi mately another four hours. At the end of this time, 61.7 kilograms of  magnesium dichloride (540 moles) are added and  heating  is continued at 70  degrees C. for another  eight hours.  The  mixture  (solution) is then  filtered through a 100 micron filter to remove undissolved magnesium dichloride and  unreacted  magnesium  (less  than  0.5  percent  by  weight).

15

25

30

100  kilograms  of  fumed  Silica having  a  particle Size in the range of from 0.1 to 1 microns are added to the mixture prepared above over a  period of about two hours. The mixture is stirred by means  of  a turbine agitator during  this time and  for Several  hours  thereafter to thoroughly disperse the Silica in the Solution. The  temperature of  the mixture is held at 70  degrees  C. throughout  this period and  a nitrogen atmosphere is maintained at all times.

35

40

The resulting  Slurry is spray dried using an 8-foot diam eter closed  cycle spray dryer equipped  with a rotary atom izer. The  rotary atomizer  is adjusted  to  give  catalyst  particles with  a  D50  of  18  microns.  The  scrubber  section of  the spray dryer is maintained at approximately minus  4  degrees C.

45

Nitrogen  gas  is introduced  into the  Spray dryer  at an  inlet temperature of  165 degrees  C. and  is circulated at a rate of approximately 1700  kilograms  per  hour.  The  catalyst  Slurry is fed  to  the  Spray  dryer  at  a  temperature  of  about  35  degrees C. and  a  rate of  90  to  95  kilograms  per  hour,  or  sufficient to yield  an  outlet  gas  temperature  of approximately  125 degrees  C.  The  atomization  pressure is slightly above  atmo 55 Spheric. Discrete Spray dried  catalyst  precursor  particles are formed. 50

The Spray dried catalyst precursor contains 2.5 weight percent Ti, 6.3 weight percent Mg, and 25 to 29 weight percent  THF.  The  particles have  a D50  of  14  microns  and  a  60 span  (D90-D10)/D50 ranging from 0.75 to 1.25 as deter mined by means of a  Leeds and Northrup Microtrac(R) particle  size analyzer  using  a  dodecane  Solvent,  The  discrete catalyst  precursor  particles  are mixed  with  mineral  oil under a nitrogen atmosphere in a 400  liter vessel equipped  with a  65 turbine agitator  to form  a  slurry  containing  approximately  28 weight  percent of  the Solid catalyst precursor.

12

To partially  activate  the  catalyst  Slurry,  a  50 weight percent  solution  of  tri-n-hexylaluminum  (TnHAI)  in  mineral oil is added to the slurry followed by mixing  for approxi mately  72  hour. The TnHAI solution  is  employed in  an amount  sufficient to provide 0.20 mole of  TnHAI  per mole of THF in  the  catalyst.  Sequentially, then a  30 weight percent solution of diethylaluminum chloride (DEAC) in mineral oil is added and  the mixture is mixed  and  held  for approximately 1 hour.  The  DEAC s employed  in an  amount i sufficient to provide 0.45 mole of  DEAC  per mole of  THF in the  catalyst.  The  mole  ratio of  total  activator  (TnHAI  plus DEAC)  to THF  is 0.65:1.

Ethylene is copolymerized with 1-butene in a fluidized bed reactor as described in U.S. Pat. No. 4,349,648. Each polymerization is continuously conducted  after equilibrium is reached under conditions set forth in Table I.  Polymer ization is initiated  in the reactor  by  continuously feeding  the above  preactivated  catalyst  precursor  into a  fluidized  bed  of polyethylene  granules  together  with  ethylene, 1-hexene,  and hydrogen.  In  example  1,  an  activator  (in  this  case,  a cocatalyst)  is  dissolved  in  isopentane  (iC5)  and fed  to reactor Separately from the preactivated catalyst.

Example 1  is  repeated in  examples 2 to  4 with  the exception  that the activator  is now  admixed  with  the catalyst in a final Step prior to addition to the reactor. Preactivated catalyst and  triethylaluminum  activator  are mixed  in-line for approximately 1 to 1.5 minutes. No  external  activator is fed to the reactor. The  reaction conditions are set forth in Table I. The  MFR  and the bulk density are shown in Table II. It will be noted that the MFR  and bulk density of  the blend change with changes in the total activator/electron donor mole ratio with little change in other polymer  properties or reaction conditions.  Although the change in MFR  is Small, changes  of  this  kind  can  have  significant effects on  end  use properties as indicated in U.S. Pat. No. 4,349,648, men tioned above. The change in Settled bulk density is greater with the highest bulk density (example 4) occurring at the lowest total activator/electron donor mole ratio.

TABLE  I

|                                 | Example              | Example              | Example              | Example              |
|---------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| REACTION CONDITIONS             | 1. Control           | 2                    | 3                    | 4                    |
| Temperature ( C.)               | 88                   | 88                   | 88                   | 88                   |
| Pressure (psia)                 | 350                  | 350                  | 350                  | 350                  |
| Comonomer Type                  | 1-butene             | 1-butene             | 1-butene             | 1-buteme             |
| C2 Partial Pressure (psia)      | 90                   | 90                   | 90                   | 90                   |
| H2/C2 Mole Ratio                | O.130                | O.125                | O.125                | O.18O                |
| C4/C2 Mole Ratio                | 340                  | 340                  | 350                  | 360                  |
| Recycle iC5 Mole %              | 6.O                  | 5.8                  | 5.6                  | 5.5                  |
| Cocatalyst Type                 | TEAL                 | TEAL                 | TEAL                 | TEAL                 |
| Drum Avg. Prod. Rate (Ibs/hr)   | 26                   | 24                   | 2O                   | 2O                   |
| Heat Balance Prod Rate (Ibs/hr) | 26                   | 24                   | 23                   | 21                   |
| SGV (ft/sec)                    | 1.7                  | 1.7                  | 1.7                  | 1.7                  |
| Bed Weight (Ibs)                | 8O                   | 8O                   | 8O                   | 8O                   |
| Reactor Residence time (hrs)    | 3.1                  | 3.3                  | 4.0                  | 4.0                  |
| Catalyst Carrier (C5 or N2)     | 3 pph iC5 O 3 pph N2 | 3 pph iC5 O 3 pph N2 | 3 pph iC5 O 3 pph N2 | 3 pph iC5 O 3 pph N2 |
| Precontacting Residence         | O                    | 1.3                  | 1.3                  | 1.3                  |

13

TABLE  II

| RESIN PROPERTIES                        | 1.         | 2          | 3          | 4          |
|-----------------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Melt Index, I2 (dg/min) Density (g/cm3) | 1.12 91.95 | 1.07 91.82 | O.90 91.85 | 1.08 91.90 |
| MFR                                     | 26.2       | 26.O       | 26.O       | 24.9       |
| Residual Al (ppm)                       | 32         | 41         | 24         | 12         |
| Residual Ti (ppm)                       | 1.12       | 1.35       | 1.43       | 1.47       |
| Total AlfT                              | 50         | 53         | 3O         | 14         |
| Added AlfTi                             | 45.4       | 48.6       | 24.7       | 9.5        |
| Total Activator/ED                      | 6.8        | 7.2        | 4.0        | 1.9        |
| Added Activator/ED                      | 6.1        | 6.5        | 3.3        | 1.3        |
| Settled Bulk Density                    | 22.7       | 23.8       | 25.5       | 27.7       |
| Average particle size (APS)             | O32        | O2O        | O2O        | O19        |
| (inches) Fines < 120 mesh, (wt %)       | 1.         | 1.         | 1.         | 1.         |

14

10

## EXAMPLES  5 to 9

Examples 5 to 9 are also embodimets of the invention. Catalyst is prepared as in Example 1. The Same reaction System is used. In these examples, however, 1-hexene is used as comonomer  and  trimethylaluminum as  activator. In the control (example 5), the  activator (cocatalyst)  is  fed Separately to the fluidized bed as a Solution in isopentane.

15  the activator:ED molar  ratios are much  higher  than those in U.S. Pat. No.  5,068,489  is  used  in Comparative  Examples  1, 3,  5,  and 6.  In the  examples using a Silica impregnated catalyst, the catalyst is introduced to the reactor as a dry powder.  In  Comparative  Examples  2,  4,  7,  and  8,  the  catalyst is  fed to the  reactor as a slurry. In these examples, the activator (cocatalyst) is fed separately to the polymerizing bed. The spray dried slurry  fed catalyst of Comparative Examples  2, 4, 7, and  8  is normally of  higher  productivity and hence  lower residual  titanium  level  than  the  Silica impregnated  catalyst. This  is illustrated by  comparing  Com parative Examples 1 and  2. Note, that despite Similar reac tion conditions,  much higher residual titanium levels are observed  at these low  activator:Timolar  ratios, even  though Examples 1 to 9 illustrating the invention; also  note the substantially lower  residual titanium for  the catalysts of  the invention. Thus, a much  more  efficacious use of  cocatalyst activator is achieved  by  the  process  of  the invention,  as  well 0  as  achieving  the same  results in  terms  of  reduced  MFR i.e., narrower  molecular weight distribution (MWD)  and lower hexane extractables. Both catalyst  productivity and  activa tor  utilization  effectiveneSS  are improved  through  addition  of the activator directly with the activated catalyst precursor composition in a hydrocarbon slurry.

TABLE  III

|                                    | Example    | Example    | Example    | Example    | Example    |
|------------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| REACTION CONDITIONS                | 5 Control  | 6          | 7          | 8          | 9          |
| Temperature (C.)                   | 88         | 88         | 88         | 88         | 88         |
| Pressure (Psia)                    | 350        | 350        | 350        | 350        | 350        |
| Comonomer Type                     | Hexene     | Hexene     | Hexene     | Hexene     | Hexene     |
| C2 Partial Pressure (Psia)         | 90         | 90         | 90         | 90         | 90         |
| H2/C2 Mole Ratio                   | O.12O      | O.120      | O.130      | O.130      | O140       |
| C6/C2 Mole Ratio                   | O.1OO      | O.1OO      | O.1OO      | O.1OO      | O.1OO      |
| Recycle iC5 Mole %                 | 6.O        | 5.9        | 6.O        | 6.O        | 6.O        |
| Cocatalyst Type                    | TMA        | TMA        | TMA        | TMA        | TMA        |
| Drum Avg. Prod. Rate (1b/hr)       | 22         | 2O         | 2O         | 2O         | 2O         |
| Heat Balance Prod Rate (1b/hr)     | 23         | 21         | 2O         | 2O         | 19         |
| SGV (ft/sec)                       | 1.7        | 1.7        | 1.7        | 1.7        | 1.7        |
| Bed Weight (Ibs)                   | 8O         | 8O         | 8O         | 8O         | 8O         |
| Reactor Residence time (hrs)       | 3.6        | 4.0        | 4.0        | 4.0        | 4.0        |
| Catalyst Carrier (N2 or            | 3 pph iC5/ | 3 pph iC5/ | 3 pph iC5/ | 3 pph iC5/ | 3 pph iC5/ |
| iC5)                               | 3 pph N2   | 3 pph N2   | 3 pph N2   | 3 pph N2   | 3 pph N2   |
| Precontacting Residence time (min) | O          | 1.3        | 1.3        | 1.3        | 1.3        |

Examples 6 to 9 utilize activator mixed directly with the preactivated catalyst  in-line  prior  to  introduction  to  the reactor. Since all of  these examples  use trimethylaluminum as activator, the effect of the invention on MFR  is more  55 difficult to ascertain Since this particular activator normally gives low MFR  values under  any  set of  circumstances. The effect  on bulk density,  however, is  still  clear  as  is  the relatively high catalyst productivity observed, even at very low  Al/Tilevels.  Variables  and  results  can  be  found  in  Tables  60 III and IV.

TABLE  IV

## COMPARATIVE  EXAMPLES  1 to 8

Comparative Examples 1 to 8 variables and results are given  in Tables V  and VI. Catalyst, prepared  as  in Example  65 1  is used in  Comparative Examples 2, 4, 7,  and 8. An impregnated version of the basic catalyst as described in

|                                         | -Examples   | -Examples   | -Examples   | -Examples   | -Examples   |
|-----------------------------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| RESIN PROPERTIES                        | 5           | 6           | 7           | 8           | 9           |
| Melt Index, I2 (dg/min) Density (g/cm3) | 0.51 9249   | O.47 .9248  | O46 .925O   | O.43 9246   | O.37 9242   |
| MFR                                     | 25.2        | 25.8        | 25.2        | 25.7        | 25.6        |
| Residual Al (ppm)                       | 21          | 22          | 15          | 11          | 5           |
| Residual Ti (ppm)                       | 1.54        | 155         | 1.53        | 1.61        | 1.64        |
| Total AlfT                              | 24          | 25          | 17          | 12          | 5           |
| Added AlfTi                             | 19.2        | 20.1        | 12.4        | 7.2         | 0.5         |
| Total Activator/ED                      | 3.2         | 3.4         | 2.3         | 1.6         | O.7         |
| Added Activator/ED                      | 2.6         | 2.7         | 1.7         | 1.O         | O1          |
| Settled Bulk Density                    | 27.1        | 27.3        | 27.4        | 27.6        | 28.5        |

15

TABLE  IV-continued

|                                       | Examples   | Examples   | Examples   | Examples   | Examples   |
|---------------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| RESIN PROPERTIES                      | 5          | 6          | 7          | 8          | 9          |
| APS (inches) Fines < 120 mesh, (wt %) | O17 4      | O18 4      | O17 5      | O18 4      | O18 4      |

16

TABLE  VI(B)-continued

| Comparative Examples RESIN PROPERTIES   | 5    | 6    | 7    | 8    |
|-----------------------------------------|------|------|------|------|
| Added Activator/ED                      | 2.8  | 4.3  | 2.6  | 2.6  |
| Settled Bulk Density                    | 25.0 | 24.O | 24.5 | 24.5 |
| APS (inches)                            | O26  | O28  | O18  | O18  |

S

TABLE  V

| Comparative Example   |
|-----------------------|
| 1. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8      |

| CATALYST INFORMATION                  | Supported   | Spray            | Supported 45/20   | Spray Dried 45/20 THAL: O.2   | Supported          | Supported   | Spray             | Spray                              |
|---------------------------------------|-------------|------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------|-------------|-------------------|------------------------------------|
| Catalyst Type Activator Ratios        | 87 350 95   | Dried 87 350 130 | O.45 87 350       | 87 350 130                    | 350 1OO            | 88 350 1OO  | Dried O.3 O.40 88 | Dried 40/30 THAL: O.3 DEAC: O40 88 |
|                                       | 45/20       | 45/20            |                   |                               | 40/30              | 40/30       | 40/30             |                                    |
| Activator 1 to ED mole ratio          | THAL: O.2   | THAL: O.2        | THAL: O.2         |                               | THAL: O.3          | THAL: O.3   | THAL:             |                                    |
| Activator 2 to ED mole ratio REACTION | DEAC: O.45  | DEAC: O.45       | DEAC:             | DEAC: O.45                    | DEAC: O.40 Control | DEAC: O40   | DEAC:             |                                    |
| CONDITIONS                            |             |                  |                   |                               |                    |             |                   |                                    |
| Temperature ( C.)                     |             |                  |                   |                               | 88                 |             |                   |                                    |
| Pressure (psia)                       |             |                  |                   |                               |                    |             | 350               | 350                                |
| Comonomer Type C2 Partial Pressure    | Hexene      | Hexene           | Hexene 130        | Hexene                        | Hexene             | Hexene      | Hexene 1OO        | Hexene 1OO                         |
| (psia) H2/C2 Mole Ratio               | O.130       | O.120            | O.166             | O.183                         | O.187              | O.185       | O.160             | O-160                              |
| C6/C2 MoleRatio                       | 140         | 125              | .112              | 125                           | 0.157              | O.150       | O.150             | O.150                              |
| Cocatalyst Feed Location              | Bed         | Bed              | Bed               | Bed                           |                    |             |                   |                                    |
| Cocatalyst Type                       | TEAL        | TEAL             | TMA               | TMA                           |                    |             |                   |                                    |
| Activator Feed Location               |             |                  |                   |                               | Into Bed           | Into        | Into              | Into                               |
|                                       |             |                  |                   |                               |                    | Bed         | Bed               | Bed                                |
| Activator Type                        |             |                  |                   |                               | TEAL               | TEAL        | TEAL              | TEAL                               |

40

What  is claimed is:

TABLE  VI(A)

| Comparative Examples RESIN PROPERTIES   | 1.    | 2     | 3    | 4    |
|-----------------------------------------|-------|-------|------|------|
| Melt Index, I2 (dg/min)                 | O.90  | O.90  | 1.OO | 1.OO |
| Density (g/cm3)                         | 91.75 | 916.1 | 9162 | 9168 |
| MFR                                     | 29.0  | 28.3  | 26.7 | 26.5 |
| Residual Ti (ppm)                       | 3.10  | 1.14  | 3.03 | 2.29 |
| Added AlfTi                             | 41.O  | 36.O  | 33.O | 18.0 |
| as Activator                            |       |       |      |      |
| Total Activator/ED                      | 6.8   | 5.3   | 5.5  | 3.0  |
| Added Activator/ED                      | 6.1   | 4.7   | 4.9  | 2.3  |
| Settled Bulk Density                    | 19.O  | 20.3  | 23.2 | 25.3 |
| APS (inch (inches)                      | O34   | O26   | O28  | O19  |

TABLE  VI(B)

| Steve RESIN PROPERTIES          | 5         | 6          | 7          | 8          |
|---------------------------------|-----------|------------|------------|------------|
| Melt Index, 12 (dg?min)         | O.93 9170 | O.82 .9210 | O.79 91.82 | O.77 91.81 |
| Density (g/cm3)                 |           |            |            |            |
| MFR                             | 25.7      | 25.3       | 25.7       | 25.8       |
| Residual Ti (ppm)               | 3.50      | 3.65       | 240        | 2.40       |
| Added AlfTi                     | 19.O      | 29.0       | 2O.O       | 2O.O       |
| as Activator Total Activator/ED | 3.5       | 5.0        | 3.3        | 3.3        |

- 1. A rocess comprising contacting  ethylene or ethylene p and  one or more  comonomers  in one or more  fluidized bed reactors, under polymerization conditions, with a catalyst System  comprising  (i)  a  Supported  or  unsupported 45  magnesium/titanium based precursor in slurry form, said precursor  containing  an  electron donor; and  (ii) an  activator containing aluminum in an amount  Sufficient to essentially complete the activation of  the precursor, the method  com rising: prising:

50

55

60

65

- A) mixing the precursor and a portion of the activator prior to introduction into the  reactor in at  least one mixing  procedure to prepare a partially activated pre CUSO
- r B) mixing the  partially  activated  precursor  with  the remainder of  the activator to essentially complete the activation  of  the  precursor  and  to  prepare  an  essentially completely activated precursor,
- C) maintaining the mixture from (A) in slurry form; and D)  introducing  the mixture  from  (B)  into the reactor  with the following  provisos.
- (i) the atomic ratio of  aluminum to titanium is in the range of  about 1:1 to about 15:1, and  the mole ratio of  activator to electron donor is about 1:1 to about 2:1:
- -(ii) the activator is one  compound  or a mixture of  two different compounds,
- (iii) each activator compound  has the formula Al(R) Xs,  wherein each R  is independently a saturated

17

aliphatic hydrocarbon radical having  1 to 14  carbon atoms,  each  X  s independently  chlorine,  bromine,  or i iodine, and n is 1 to 3; and

- (iv)  no  additional  activator  is  introduced  into  the reactor(s).

18

tor  is a  Sequential  mixture  Selected  from  the group  consisting of  a mixture of  tri-n-hexylaluminum and diethylaluminum chloride; a mixture of triethylaluminum and diethylalumi num chloride;  and a  mixture  of trimethylaluminum and dimethylaluminum chloride.

- 2. The proceSS as claimed in claim 1 wherein, in each activator, R  is Selected  from  the  group  consisting  of  methyl, ethyl, n-butyl, isobutyl, n-hexyl, and n-octyl. activator is Selected from the group consisting of tri-ethyl  10  two  or  three R  radicals can  be  joined  to form  a  heterocyclic 5.  The  process  as  claimed  in  claim  1  wherein  the  activator has  the formula RA1  or  RAIX  wherein  each R  is indepen dently alkyl, cycloalkyl,  aryl, or  hydrogen;  at least one R  is hydrocarbyl, each hydrocarbyl has 1 to 20  carbon atoms; Structure; and X  is chlorine, bromine,  or iodine.
- 6. The  process as claimed  in claim 1 wherein  the atomic ratio of  aluminum  to titanium is in the range of  about  1:1 to about 10:1.
- 3.  The proceSS as  claimed in  claim  1  wherein each aluminum, tri-n-butyl  aluminum, tri-n-hexyl  aluminum, tri-n  octyl  aluminum, triisobutyl  aluminum,  tri-methyl aluminum, diethyl aluminum chloride dimethyl aluminum chloride, and  diuSobutyl aluminum chloride.
- 4. The  proceSS  as  claimed  in claim 1 wherein  two  mixing  15 procedures  are carried out in procedure (A), and  the activa