## (12)  United  States Patent Braganca et al.

## (54) SOLID  CATALYST  COMPONENT  FOR POLYMERIZATION  AND COPOLYMERIZATION  OF  ETHYLENE  AND PROCESS FOR  OBTAINING  THE  SAME

(75)

Inventors:  Antonio  Luiz  Duarte  Braganca,  Porrto Alegre  (BR); Marcia  Silva Lacerda Miranda,  Porto  Alegre  (BR); Leandro dos  Santos  Silveira,  Canoas  (BR): Richard  Faraco  Amorim,  Porto  Alegre (BR)

(73)

Assignee:  BRASKEM  S.A.,  Camacari  (BR)

(*)  Notice:

Subject  to any  disclaimer,  the  term  of his t patent is extended or adjusted under 35 U.S.C. 154(b)  by  0  days.

(21) Appl.  No.: 13/440,384

(22) Filed: Apr.  5,  2012

## (65) Prior Publication Data

US  2012/O190805  A1 Jul. 26,  2012

## Related U.S.  Application Data

(63) Continuation-in-part of  application No. 10/518,443, filed  as  application  No.  PCT/BR02/00086  on  Jun. 19, 2002,  now  abandoned.

(51) Int.  Cl.

CSF  4/76

(2006.01)

CSF  IO/02

(2006.01)

BOI.3L/02

(2006.01)

BOI.3L/2

(2006.01)

BOI  3/14

(2006.01)

BOI  3/32

(2006.01)

COSF  I  IO/O2

(2006.01)

COSF  2  IO/16

(2006.01)

(52) U.S.  Cl.

CPC ..........  B01J  31/0231  (2013.01); B01J  31/0212 (2013.01); B01J  31/124  (2013.01); B01.J

US0093.52308B2

<!-- image -->

- (10)  Patent  No.:

US  9,352,308  B2

- (45)  Date  of  Patent:

May  31,  2016

31/143  (2013.01); B01.J31/32  (2013.01); C08F

10/02  (2013.01); C08F  110/02  (2013.01); C08F

210/16  (2013.01)

- (58) Field of  Classification  Search

None

See  application file for  complete  search  history.

## (56) References  Cited

## U.S. PATENT  DOCUMENTS

5,  192,731  A  *

3/1993  Kioka  et  al.

..................

5,585,317 A

12/1996  Sacchetti et al.

## FOREIGN  PATENT  DOCUMENTS

| EP   | O 045 885 A   | 2, 1982   |
|------|---------------|-----------|
| EP   | O 240 254 A   | 10, 1987  |
| EP   | O 408 750 A   | 1, 1991   |
| EP   | O 480 435 A   | 4f1992    |
| EP   | O 522 651 A   | 1, 1993   |
| WO   | WO91/08239 A1 | 6, 1991   |

* cited  by  examiner

Primary Examiner  -  un  Qian Y

(74) Attorney, Agent, or Firm  -  irch, Stewart, Kolasch  &amp; B Birch, LLP

## (57) ABSTRACT

Disclosed  is a  process for  obtaining  a  Solid  catalyst compo nent  for  ethylene  polymerization  and copolymerization, wherein  a  carrier  of  particulate  silica  (65  to  85% y  weight)  is b impregnated  with  a  catalytically  active  portion  (15  to  35% y b weight) including titanium,  magnesium, chlorine, alkoxy groups and at least one organometallic compound of  the groups 1, 2, 12  or  13  of  the  periodic  table. Further,  the  inven tion refers  to  the  solid  catalyst  component  thus  obtained  and to a  process for  ethylene  polymerization  and  copolymeriza tion wherein is used said catalyst. The  catalyst obtained is suitable  for  the  production  of  ethylene  homo-  nd  copolymers a as narrow molecular  weight distribution high density poly ethylene  (NMWHDPE)  and  linear low  density  polyethylene (LLDPE)  with controlled morphology  and  improved  struc ture.

## 2  Claims,  6 Drawing  Sheets

502,110

FIGURE  1

<!-- image -->

## FIGURE  2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

FIGURE  4

<!-- image -->

FIGURES

<!-- image -->

FIGURE  6

98)

<!-- image -->

1.

## SOLID  CATALYST  COMPONENT  FOR POLYMERIZATION  AND COPOLYMERIZATION  OF ETHYLENE  AND PROCESS FOR  OBTAINING  THE  SAME

This application is a  Continuation-In-Part of  application Ser.  No.  10/518,443  filed  Jul. 1,  2005,  now  abandoned  which is the National  phase  of  PCT  International Application No. PCT/BR2002/000086  filed on  Jun. 19,  2002,  all of  which  are hereby  expressly incorporated by reference into the  present application.

10

15

The  present  invention  relates  to  a  solid  catalyst  component for ethylene polymerization and copolymerization, com posed  of  a  carrier  of articulate  silica  and  a  catalytically  active p portion  including titanium,  magnesium, chlorine,  alkoxy groups and at least one organometallic compound of the groups 1, 2, 12  or 13 of  the periodic table. The  process for producing  the  catalyst  of  the  present  invention  comprises  the steps of:

- (a) impregnating  an  activated silica particles with  a  solution ofan  organometallic  compound  of  the  groups  1, 2, 12  or  13 of  the  periodic  table, in an  inert  organic  solvent;
- (b) removing  the  Supernatant  liquid  from  the  step (a):
- (c) preparing a solution obtained by reacting at least one  25 magnesium  compound,  selected from  magnesium  halides and  magnesium  alkoxides  and  at least one  titanium com pound  selected  from  titanium  alkoxides  and  titanium  halo gen  alkoxides;
- (d) impregnating  the  silica obtained  in (b) using  the  Solution prepared  in (c);

30

- (e)  optionally reacting  the  solid  obtained  in (d)  with  a  reduc ing  agent;
- (f)  reacting  the  solid  obtained  in  (d)  or  (e)  with  a  halogenating agent,
- (g)  thermally  treating the  Solid  obtained  in (f);
- (h) washing the Solid obtained in (g) with an inert organic solvent;
- (i) optionally, washing  the  Solid obtained  in (h) with  a  solu tion of one or more organometallic compounds of the  40  effluents which  are  hard  to treat. groups 1, 2, 12  or  13  of he  periodic table. t

2

Therefore,  it  is  crucial  for  the  process  that  the  catalyst  used enables  a  total  control  of he  polymer  morphology  resulting  in t product  grains  without  fines,  with  high  bulk  density  and  ood g flowing  properties.

Another very important aspect is that the catalyst must have a slow decaying time to permit the use of  reactors in series. This arrangement makes  possible the obtainment of bimodal products in addition to the reduction of  the total volume  of  the  reaction  for  the  same  production  basis. More over,  process  operations  with  a  different  condition  of eaction r in at least two  reactors in series, makes  possible the use of catalysts with higher particle size thereby minimizing the formation  of  electrostatic charges.

## 2)  Polymer  Structure

The catalyst properties are fundamental to the polymer structure,  mainly  with  respect  to  the  molecular  weight  distri bution, comonomer insertion in the polymeric chain and soluble  content.

Each  application  used  to  achieve  a  final  product  from  high density polyethylene  (HDPE)  or  linear  low  density  polyeth ylene  (LLDPE)  requires  a  specific polymeric  structure.

To obtain a film with improved optical and mechanical properties  and  avoid  blocking  problems,  a  polymer  having  a narrow  molecular  weight  distribution  (MFR&lt;27),  is required. A  large quantity of  LLDPE  applications requires products with a density=0.918 and a MI=0.7, and in most cases a xylene soluble content&lt;10% is  desired. Indeed, when the Xylene soluble content of  the polymer  is present in a  high concentration (&gt;10%)  and  with  a  low  molecular  weight,  this soluble content  tends to migrate  to the film Surface causing blocking,  in addition to the unsatisfactory optical properties (low  gloss  and  high haze).

3)  Ziegler-Natta Polyethylene  Catalyst

Due  to  the  strong  competition  existent  in  the  polyethylene market,  the  catalyst  production  cost  is  a  fundamental  compo nent.  Therefore  it is mandatory  that  the  catalyst  for  producing polyethylene be manufactured  by  a simple route, from low cost  raw  material,  without  generating  gaseous,  liquid  or  Solid

The  catalyst  component  obtained  is especially  suitable  for the  production  of  homo-  and  copolymers  of  ethylene  as nar row molecular  weight  distribution  high  density  polyethylene and  linear  low  density  polyethylene  with  controlled  morphol  45 ogy  and  improved  structure.

## BACKGROUND  OF  THE  INVENTION

## 1) Polymerization Process

50

60

65

The slurry or gas phase processes for the production of HDPE  or  LLDPE  operating  with  low  bulk  density  polymers require reactors with large Volumes in order to obtain the necessary  residence  time. Particularly,  in  the  gas  phase  reac tors, the  presence  offines  with  low  bulk  density  causes  prob  55 lems. In fact, due to the friction of  the polymer  particles present in the reactor, the fines are especially prone to the formation of  electrostatic charges and tend to deposit and adhere  to the metallic walls. These  stagnant  deposits do not allow  the  exchange  of  the  reaction  heat  and  ecome ot  spots, b h which  can  form  layers  of  agglomerates  containing  eventually melt  polymer.  After  a  period  of ime  chunks  of gglomerates t a can fall down  and  plug  the product discharge system. The described effects are enhanced  when  the reaction is carried out  with  a  highly  active  catalyst.

In U.S. Pat. No. 5,410.002 a summary  of  patents on the above  described  phenomena  is presented.

U.S.  Pat. No.  5,585,317  describes the  synthesis of  a  cata lyst Supported on a magnesium chloride based carrier. The reported  examples  relates  to  the  production  of  polymers  hav ing good  morphology,  characterized  by  the  absence  of  fines and  by  the  high  bulk  density  which  is, for  LLDPE,  produced between  0.32  and  0.40  g/ml  and  for  HDPE,  between  0.33  and 0.438  g/ml.

U.S.  Pat. No.  5,188,997  describes  a  synthesis  process for Ziegler-Natta catalysts from silica and  magnesium  chloride alcoholate.  The  results  reported  demonstrate  that  this  catalyst produces  a  polymer  with  low  bulk  density  (0.23  to  0.30  g/ml) and  with  an  intermediate  molecular  weight  distribution  (MFR 30.0 to 37.8).

However, in the  case  of  LLDPE  production, the  polymer obtained  presents  an  undesired  comonomer  distribution  in  its chain,  evidenced  by  the  high  xylene  soluble  content  at  differ ent polymer  densities. As  an example, a polyethylene with 0.919  g/ml  of  polymer  density  has  a  xylene  soluble  content  of 12.5%  by  weight.

## SUMMARY  OF  THE  INVENTION

The  present  invention  relates  to  a  solid  catalyst  component for ethylene polymerization and copolymerization, com posed  of  a  carrier  of articulate  silica  and  a  catalytically  active p portion  including titanium,  magnesium, chlorine,  alkoxy groups and at least one organometallic compound of  the

35

3

groups 1, 2, 12  or 13 of  the periodic table. The  process for producing  the  catalyst  of  the  present  invention  comprises  the steps of:

- (a) impregnating  activated silica particles with  a  solution of an  organometallic  compound  of  the  groups  1, 2, 12  or  13  of  5 the  periodic  table, in an  inert  organic  solvent;
- (b) removing  the  Supernatant  liquid  from  the  step (a):

10

- (c) preparing a solution obtained by reacting at least one magnesium  compound,  selected from  magnesium  halides and  magnesium  alkoxides  and  at least one  titanium com pound  selected  from  titanium  alkoxides  and  titanium  halo gen  alkoxides;

4

FIGS.  4-6  provides  XANES pectra  at  the  Ti  Kedge or  the s f catalyst  of  Example  8.

## DETAILED  DESCRIPTION

In  the  present  specification,  the  expression  Catalyst  Decay means  the  half-life  time  of  the  active  sites of   solid  catalyst a component  which  is measured  as  the  time  required  for  reach ing  50% f  the  initial  catalyst  activity  during  a  polymerization o run. A  catalyst with low decay kinetics has  a half-life time preferably  higher  than  3  hours.

- (d) impregnating  the  silica obtained  in (b) using  the  Solution prepared  in (c);
- (e) optionally  reacting  the  Solid  obtained  in (d) with  a  reduc ing  agent;
- (f)  reacting  the  solid  obtained  in  (d)  or  (e)  with  a  halogenating agent,
- (g)  thermally  treating the  Solid  obtained  in (f);
- (h) washing the Solid obtained in (g) with an inert organic solvent;
- (i) optionally, washing  the  Solid obtained  in (h) with  a  solu tion of  one  or more  metal-alkyl halide compounds  of  the groups 1, 2, 12  or  13  of he  periodic table. t

Therefore, the  present  invention provides  a  catalyst  espe cially suitable for the production of  ethylene homo- and copolymers with a narrow molecular weight distribution, high density polyethylene (NMWHDPE)  and a linear low density polyethylene  (LLDPE)  with  controlled morphology and  improved  structure.

2O  metallic  compounds  of  the  groups  1,  2, 12  or  13,  to  give  a  solid 15 The  present  invention  discloses  a  Solid  component obtained  from  the  interaction  of  a  reaction  product  between  at least one magnesium compound, chosen from magnesium halides and  magnesium  alkoxides and  at least one  titanium compound  chosen  from  titanium  alkoxides  and  titanium  halo gen  alkoxides,  an  activated  silica  impregnated  with  the  orga nometallic compounds of  the groups 1, 2, 12 or 13 and a halogenating agent, capable of  interacting with  the organo catalyst component, which is highly active in the polymer ization  and copolymerization  of ethylene.  Optionally,  a reducing  agent  can be  used  during  the  process  of  preparing the  present  catalyst  component.

25

30

Additionally, the catalyst described and claimed in the present invention produces a NMWHDPE  with a melt flow ratio (MFR)  lower than 27 that is particularly suitable for thermoforming  and  injection  applications.

Accordingly,  the  present  invention concerns  a  process  for the preparation of  a Solid catalyst component  for the poly merization  of  ethylene  and  the  copolymerization  of thylene e with alpha-olefins which comprises a carrier of  silica par ticles  (65  to  85%  y  weight)  and  a  catalytically  active  portion b (15  to  35% y  weight)  including  titanium,  magnesium,  chlo b rine, alkoxy groups and at least one organometallic com pound of  the groups 1,  2,  12 or 13 of  the periodic table. According to FIG. 1, this process comprises the following steps:

35

Further, the  catalyst described  and  claimed  in the  present invention  produces  a  LLDPE  with  a  low  xylene  soluble  con tent  due  to  the  very  good  comonomer  insertion allowing  the production  of  films  with  Superior  optical  properties  and  very  40 low  blocking.

The  present invention further defines a catalyst that pro vides, when Submitted to polymerization conditions, par ticles  of olyethylene  and  ethylene  copolymers  having  a  high p bulk  density  and  containing  a  very  Small  quantity of  fines.

45

The  present  invention  additionally  provides  a  catalyst  use ful in liquid phase  or in gas  phase,  ethylene  polymerization processes.

The  present  invention  further  provides  a  catalyst  useful  in polymerization processes due to its high activity and low decay  kinetics.

50

- (a) impregnating  an  activated  silica particles with a  solu tion of  an  organometallic  compound  of  the  groups 1, 2, 12  or  13  of he  periodic  table,  in  an  inert  organic  solvent; t
- (b)  removing  the  Supernatant  liquid  from  the  step (a):
- (c) preparing  a  solution obtained  by  reacting  at least one magnesium  compound,  selected  from  magnesium halides  and  magnesium  alkoxides and  at least one  tita nium compound  selected from titanium alkoxides and titanium  halogen  alkoxides;
- (d) impregnating  the  silica obtained  in (b) using  the  solu tion  prepared  in (c);
- (e)  optionally reacting the Solid obtained in (d) with a reducing  agent,
- (f) reacting  the Solid obtained  in (d) or  (e) with  a  haloge nating  agent;
- (g)  thermally  treating  the  Solid  obtained  in  (f);
- (h)  washing  the  Solid  obtained  in  (g)  with  an  inert  organic solvent;

## BRIEF  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  DRAWING

The  present  invention will  become  more  fully understood 55 from the detailed  description given hereinbelow and the accompanying  drawings, which  are  given  by  way  of  illustra tion  only,  and  thus  are  not  limitative  of he  present  invention, t and  wherein:

- FIG.  1  herein  is a  flowchart,  which  illustrates  the  preferred embodiment  of  the  present  invention for  preparing  the  Solid catalyst  component;  and
- FIG.  2  is  a  flow  diagram  of   fluidized  bed,  gas  phase  pilot a plant  used  to  produce  polyethylene.
- FIG. 3  provides UV-VIS  spectroscopy for the catalyst of Example  8.

65

60  tents  of  90%  by  weight,  a  surface  area  ranging  from  250  to In  step  (a)  of he  process  according  to  the  present  invention, t the preferable silica for this purpose is a microspheroidal, porous  silica  having  an  average  particle  size  ranging  from  10 to 120  um,  preferably between 15  and  100  um,  a  SiO  con &gt; 500 m/g, preferably between 300 and 400 m/g, a pore volume  ranging  from  1.0  to 2.0  ml/g,  preferably  between  1.5 and  1.8 ml/g,  and  an  average  pore  diameter  ranging  from 10 to  40  nm,  preferably  between  20 nd  30  nm.  This  silica  should a be  submitted  to  an  activation  treatment  before  being  impreg nated,  which  can  be  carried  out  by eating  the  silica  in  an  inert h atmosphere, at a temperature ranging from 100  to 750° C.

- (i) optionally, washing the solid obtained in (h) with a Solution of  one  or more  organometallic compounds  of the  groups 1, 2, 12  or  13  of  the  periodic  table.

5

6

over  a  period  from 1 to 20  hours.  The  amount  of  remaining OH  on  the  silica surface  after  this treatment  ranges  from  0.1 to 2  mmoles  OH er  g  of  silica, preferably between  0.5  and p 1.5 mmoles  OH er  g  of  silica. p a  clear  Solution. Specific  organic  Solvents used  for  the  above mentioned solution can be aliphatic hydrocarbons having between 4 and 50 carbons, preferably between 6 and 20 carbons. Specific examples of  these  aliphatic hydrocarbons used  as  organic  solvents  are:  hexane,  heptane,  octane,  isopar affin, most  preferably  hexane  and  heptane.

The  magnesium  compounds  Suitable  for  the  purpose  of  the invention  are  those  having  the  formulae  MgX or  Mg OR), ( wherein R  represents a  linear  or  branched  alkyl  group,  con taining  from  1 to 10  carbons  and  X epresents  a  halogenatom r and  preferably  a  chlorine  atom.  Specific  examples  of  agne m sium compounds are magnesium dichloride,  magnesium diethylate, magnesium di-n-butylate, magnesium diisopro pylate  and  magnesium  diisobutylate.

The  impregnation  is preferably carried  out  by  Suspending 10  to  20 arts  by  weight  of ilica  for  each  100  parts  by  volume p s of  a  solution  of n  organometallic  compound  of  the  groups  1, a 2, 12 or 13, in aliphatic hydrocarbons, and  maintaining  the Solution with stirring at a temperature which ranges from room  temperature to the  boiling  point of  the  solution of  the  10 organometallic compound  of  the groups 1, 2, 12 or 13, in aliphatic  hydrocarbons,  preferably  at  room  temperature,  over a  period  from  30  to 120  minutes,  preferably  between  50  and 60  minutes.

30

The  organometallic  compounds  of  groups 1, 2, 12  or 13 of  15 the periodic table suitable for use  in step (a) are  alkyl com pounds  and  alkyl halide compounds  of  metals belonging  to these  groups,  and  preferably  aluminum,  magnesium,  lithium and  Zinc  compounds.  Specific  examples  of  these  compounds are  trimethylaluminum,  triethylaluminum  (TEAL),  methyla luminum  dichloride,  methylaluminum  sesquichloride,  isobu tylaluminum dichloride, isobutylaluminum sesquichloride, ethylaluminum dichloride (EADC),  diethylaluminum chlo ride (DEAC),  ethylaluminum sesquichloride  (EASC),  tri-nhexylaluminum (Tn-HAL), tri-n-octylaluminum (TnOAL).  25  the  corresponding  titanium mono-  or  di-chloroalkoxides. butyl ethylmagnesium (BEM),  butyl octylmagnesium (BOMAG),  methylmagnesium  chloride  and  ethylmagnesium chloride. They  can be  used concentrated or  preferably dis Solved  in the  above  organic solvent or  in a  different organic Solvent  chosen  from  aliphatic hydrocarbons. The  amount  of  magnesium compound  used in the above preparation corresponds  to  the  amount  ranging  from  0.0024 to 0.24  g  of  magnesium  per  g  of  silica, preferably between 0.0042  and  0.042  g  of  magnesium  per  g  of  silica. The  titanium compounds  most  Suited for  the  purpose  are alkoxides and chloroalkoxides, containing from 1 to 4  car bons  in  the  alkoxide  portion.  Specific  examples  of  these  com pounds  are:  titanium  tetra-n-propylate,  titanium  tetra-n-buty late, titanium  tetra-1-propylate,  titanium  tetra-1-butylate  and The amount of titanium compound used in the above preparation  corresponds  to  an  amount  ranging  from  0.01 to 1 g  of itanium per  g  of  silica, preferably between  0.0175  and t 0.175  g  of itanium  per  g  of ilica. t s

Specific aliphatic hydrocarbons used  as solvents for the above mentioned solution can have  between 4 and 50  car bons,  preferably  between  6  and  20 carbons.  Specific examples  of  these  aliphatic  hydrocarbons  used  as  solvents  are hexane,  heptane,  octane,  isoparaffin,  and  the  more  preferably  35 hexane  and  heptane.

In general, when preparing the solution of  the step (c), titanium  is used  in  Such  an  amount  that  the  molar  ratio  Ti/Mg varies within  the  range  of  0.3 to  4,  and  preferably  within  the range  of  0.5  to 2.

In step (a) of  the  process,  the  impregnation  step using  the Solution  of  organometallic  compound  of  the  groups  1,  2, 12  or 13, in aliphatic hydrocarbons, is carried out by using an amount  of  organometallic compound,  ranging  from  0.1 to 1 mmole  of  the organometallic solution per  mmole  of  OH n o the silica surface, preferably 0.3 to 0.7 mmoles  of  the orga nometallic  solution  per  mmole  of  OH n  the  silica surface. o

At  the  end  of he  impregnation  treatment,  the  silica can  be t removed  (step  b)  from  the  Suspension  by  usual  methods  such  45 as settling and siphoning, filtration or centrifugation. The operating  temperature  of  this step can vary  from  room  tem perature  to  the  boiling  point  of he  aliphatic  hydrocarbonused t as  the  solvent,  preferably  at  room  temperature.  The  wet  silica is directly used  in the  next  step. According  to the  present invention, in step (c) of  the  pro cess, a  liquid component  from  the  reaction  between  at least one  magnesium  compound,  chosen  from  magnesium  halides and magnesium alkoxides and at least one titanium com pound,  chosen  from  titanium  alkoxides  and  titanium  halogen  55 alkoxides, is prepared. Generally, it is necessary  to  heat  the mixture  of  these  compounds,  at  a  temperature  in  the  range  of about 100° C. to about  200° C.,  preferably  between 140° C. and 160° C., over a period of  time from 1  to 100  hours, preferably  between  10  and  30  hours.  The  mixture  comprising  60  carbon  atoms, alkoxyl with 1  to 10  carbon atoms, aryloxyl said compounds  has  to be  prepared under  turbulent stirring and  underinert  conditions.  After  the  formation  of  the  product obtained  from  the  reaction  between  these  compounds,  which is  noted by the disappearance of  the Solid Suspension, the temperature  of  the  obtained  liquid  product  can  be  reduced  to ambient  temperature  without  precipitation of  any  solid. This liquid  component  is diluted  in  an  inert  organic  solvent  to  form 50 65 Optionally  the  solid  component  obtained  in  step  (d)  can  be Submitted  to reducing  conditions in a step (e). Said  result is obtained, for example, by using reducing agents, such as Na-alkyls, Li-alkyls, Zn-alkyls, Mg-alkyls and correspond ing  aryl-derivatives,  Grignard  compounds  of  the  type  RMgX. wherein R  represents a  linear  or  branched  alkyl  group,  con taining  from 1 to 10  carbons  or  aryl-derivatives  and  X epre r sents  a  halogenatom  and  preferably  a  chlorine  atom,  Al-alkyl halide  compounds  or  by  using  reducing  agents  such  as  silicon compounds. Particularly effective silicone compounds are the polymethylhydrosiloxanes in which the monomer  unit has the general formula HSiR-O  I, wherein R  is H. halogen, alkyl with 1 to 10  carbon  atoms, aryl with 6  to 10 with 6 to 10  carbon atoms  or  carboxyl with 1 to 10  carbon atoms, and n  is  a degree of polymerization that ranges between 5  and 100. Specific examples  of  such  polymethyl hydrosiloxanes  (PMHS)  include  the  compounds:  (CH)SiO (CH)HSiO,  Si(CH),  (CHHSiO)  (CHHSiO),  HSi O  SiH OSiRI, phenylhydropolysiloxanes in which the hydrogen  atoms  can  be  partially replaced  by  methyl  groups.

40  to  200 arts  by  volume  of  the  component  prepared  on  step  (c) In  step  (d)  the  silica  obtained  in step  (b)  is suspended  in  an inert organic solvent, such  as a  hydrocarbon Solvent of  the aliphatic  type,  preferably  the  same  used  in  the  previous  steps and  the  dissolved  product  prepared  in  step  (c)  is added  to  the Suspension. The  impregnation is carried out by Suspending 100  parts  by  weight  of ilica, obtained  on  step  (b), for  each  5 s p and  after  dilution  in  the  inert  organic  solvent.  The  Suspension is maintained  under  stirring  at  a  temperature  that  ranges  from room  temperature  to  the  boiling  point  of he  mixture,  prefer t ably  at  60°C.,  over  a  period  of  time  from  30  to 180  minutes, preferably between 50  and  60 minutes. In this way  a solid component  Suspended  in  an  inert  organic  solvent  is obtained.

7

8

Other  silicon compounds  useful  as reducing  agents  in the practice  of his invention  are: silanes (SiH,  n which  m t i is a  number  equal  to or  higher  than 1), alkyl-silanes or  aryl silanes  (RSiH, n  which  Risalkyl  oraryland  X  is  a  number i varying from 1  to 3) and  alkoxy-silanes or aryloxy-silanes (RO,  SiH,  in which R  is alkyl or  aryl and  x  is a number varying  from 1 to 3).

from  60°  C.  to 120°  C.,  preferably  from  60°C.  to  75°C.,  when hexane  is used  as  the  organic  solvent.

5

At  the  step  (h)  after  the  thermal  treatment,  the  solid  can  be separated from  the Suspension, for  example  by  settling and siphoning, filtration or  centrifugation, washed  with  an inert organic  solvent,  preferably  hexane,  and  then  dried.  The  ash w ing  temperature  can  vary  from  room  temperature  to  the  boil ing point  of  the  aliphatic  hydrocarbon  used  as  solvent,  pref erably  at room  temperature.

25

When  using more  than one  organometallic compound  in the step (i), the different  compounds  can  be  fed  in the same Solution or in individual Solutions, at the same  time or in

The  reducing  agent  chosen  from  the  above  examples,  pref erably polymethylhydrosiloxanes (PMHS), is added to the solid  obtained  in  the  step  (d),  dissolved  preferably  in  the  same inert organic solvent used  for  the reaction Suspension. This addition  is  carried  out  slowly  over   period  of ime  from  30  to a t 180  minutes,  preferably  between  50  and  80  minutes  and  the Solid  Suspension  is maintained  under  stirring  at  a  temperature ranging from room temperature to the boiling point of  the aliphatic  hydrocarbon  used  as  solvent,  preferably  at 60° C. The  amount  of  reducing  agent  that  can  be  used  in  step  (e) corresponds  to  the  amount  ranging  from  0 o  2  moles  per  mole t of  titanium, preferably between  0  and  0.1 mole  per  mole  of titanium. It has been observed, in the experiments, that the quantity  used  of his  reducing  agent  can  control  the  amount  of t titanium fixed on  silica at  the  final  catalyst. In the next step of  the process according to the present invention,  the  Suspension  obtained  in (d)  or  (e), which  is still under stirring, is put in contact and  interacted with one or more  halogenating  agents. preferably dissolved  in an  inert  organic  solvent. Representa  30  temperature,  for  a  period  of ime  that  can  vary  from 10  min 10 15 Optionally,  the  solid  obtained  in  (h)  is washed  with  a  solu tion  of  organometallic  compounds  of  the  groups  1,  2, 12  or  13. More  specifically, in  the  optional  step  (i)  the  solid  obtained  in step (h) is  suspended in an inert organic solvent such as hexane  or  heptane,  and  it is put  in contact  with one  or  more organometallic  compounds  of  the  groups  1, 2, 12  or  13  of  the periodic table, preferably metal-alkyl compounds or metal alkylhalide  compounds  belonging  to  these  groups,  in  special aluminum, magnesium, lithium and Zinc compounds. Spe cific  examples of these compounds are methylaluminum dichloride, methylaluminum sesquichloride, isobutylalumi num  dichloride, isobutylaluminum sesquichloride,  ethylalu minum  dichloride  (EADC),  diethylaluminum  chloride (DEAC),  ethylaluminum  sesquichloride  (EASC),  tri-n-hexy laluminum (Tn-HAL),  tri-n-octylaluminum (TnOAL).  They can  be  used  concentrated  or  preferably  dissolved  in  the  above organic  solvent  or  in  a  different  organic  solvent  chosen  from aliphatic hydrocarbons.  The  process is carried out  at a  tem perature  ranging  from  room  temperature  to the  boiling  point of  the organic solvent used as solvent, preferably at room t utes  to 24  hours,  preferably  from  40  minutes  to 5  hours.

trichlorosilane, dimethyl dichlorosilane, TiCl,  VC1,  CC1,  40  metal-alkyl halide  compound  of  the  groups 1, 2, 12  or 13 or The  amount of  the metal-alkyl halide compound of  the groups 1, 2, 12  or  13  or  metal-alkyl  compound  of he  groups t 1, 2, 12  or  13,  used  in  the  step  (i) of he  process  corresponds t to the amount  ranging from 0  to 3 g  of  the corresponding metal-alkyl compound  of  the  groups 1, 2, 12  or 13, per  g  of dry catalyst component  obtained, preferably between 0.05 and  1 g  of he  corresponding  metal-alkylhalide  compound  of t the groups 1, 2, 12 or 13 or metal-alkyl compound  of  the groups  1,  2,  12 or 13, per g of dry catalyst component obtained.

Halogenating  agents useful in the practice of  the  present invention can be  either liquid or  gaseous materials, pure or tive  but  non-exhaustive  examples  of  halogenating  agents  use ful in  the  present  invention are  methylaluminum  dichloride, methylaluminum sesquichloride, isobutylaluminum dichlo ride, isobutylaluminum sesquichloride, ethylaluminum dichloride  (EADC),  diethylaluminum  chloride  (DEAC),  35  Subsequent  additions. ethylaluminum sesquichloride (EASC), SiCl, SnCl4, HCl, Cl, HSiCl, aluminum chloride,  ethylboron  dichloride, boron  chloride,  diethylboron  chloride, HCC1,  PC1,  POCl, acetyl chlorides, thionyl chloride, sulfur chloride, methyl t-butyl chloride, n-butyl chloride, chloroform, 1,1,1-trichlo roethane, 1.1.2-trichloroethane, 1,2-dichloroethane and dichloromethane.

The  preferred  halogenating  agents  are  chlorinating  agents and  of  these  SiCl,  SnCl4,  HCl,  Cl,  HSiCl,  methyl  trichlo  45 rosilane, dimethyl dichlorosilane, t-butyl chloride, n-butyl chloride, chloroform, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, 1,1,2-trichloro ethane,  1,2-dichloroethane and dichloromethane are pre ferred, most  preferably  SiCl

The  amount  of  halogenating  agent  used  in  the  step  (f)  of he  50 t process corresponds to the amount ranging from 0.5 to 3 moles  of  halogenating  agent  per  mole  of  titanium,  preferably between 1  and 1.8 moles  of  halogenating  agent  per  mole  of titanium.

The use of  inert organic solvents, most specifically ali phatic  hydrocarbons,  in  all  process  steps  of  the  present  inven tion brings another important feature to the Solid catalyst component characteristics. The Solid  catalyst  component obtained  is completely  free  of esidual  polar  solvents,  such  as r ethanol,  and  their  derivatives  in  its final composition.

The time  necessary  for halogenating Ti-alkoxide and  55  the  Timetal  content,  and  it is preferably  comprised  between The  titanium  amount  that  remains  fixed  on  the Solid cata lyst  component  may  reach  up  to 10%  by  weight,  expressed  as 0.5  and  2% y  weight. b

According  to the  present invention, in step (g) of  the  pro cess,  the  Solid  obtained  in  (f)  is  kept  nder igher  temperature u h that  depends  on  the inert  organic  solvent  used.

optionally  Mg-alkoxide  varies  from  0.5  hour  to  5  hours,  pref erably from 1.5 hours to 2.5 hours. The  temperature  of  the Solid  Suspension  halogenation  ranges  from  room  temperature to the boiling point of  the aliphatic hydrocarbon used as solvent,  preferably  at 60° C.

60  between  0.3  and  3.0%  by  weight. The magnesium amount that remains fixed on the Solid catalyst  component  may  reach  up  to  6% y  weight,  expressed b as the Mg  metal content, and it  is  preferably comprised

The  time  necessary  for  this thermal  treatment  of he  solid t obtained  in  step  (f) ranges  from  0.5  hour o  5  hours,  preferably  65 t from 3 to 5 hours. The ideal temperature for this purpose depends  on  the  organic  solvent  used  and  it can  be  conducted

The  chlorine  amount  that remains  fixed  on  the  solid  cata lyst  component  may  reach  up  to  20% y  weight,  expressed  as b the C1  contents,  and  it is preferably between  5 and 12%  by weight.

The  alkoxy  amount  that  remains  fixed  on  the  Solid  catalyst component  may  reach up  to 20%  by  weight  and  it is prefer ably  between  3  and  8% y  weight. b

The  amount  of  organometallic  compound  of  the  groups  1, 2, 12  or  13  that  remains  fixed  on  the  solid  catalyst  component may  reach up  to 5%  by  weight,  expressed  as  the  metal  con tents,  and  it  is  preferably  between  0.3  and  3% y  weight.  This b organometallic compound  of  the groups 1, 2, 12 or 13 are metal-alkyl compounds or metal-alkyl halide compounds belonging  to  these  groups,  in special  organoaluminum,  orga nomagnesium, organolithium and organozinc compounds, pure  or  in mixtures.

15

The  catalyst  component  of  the  present  invention  is  Suitable for  using  in liquid  phase  or  gas  phase,  ethylene  polymeriza tion  process.  The  co-catalyst  used  in  the  polymerization  pro cess  is  an  alkyl-aluminum,  preferably  trimethyl  aluminum  or triethyl  aluminum.  The  mass  ratio co-catalyst:catalyst in the polymerization  process is between  0.5:1 and  6.0:1.

The  particle size distribution of he  solid catalyst compo  10 t nent  of  the  present  invention  is very  close  to  the  silica  used  as carrier and,  as consequence, its average  particle size ranges also  from  10  to 120  um.  The  solid  catalyst  component  surface area  ranges  from  80  to  300  m/g nd  its pore  volume  ranges a from  0.1 to 1.0  ml/g.

An  important feature is its ability to produce, when  sub mitted to polymerization conditions, particles of  homo  and copolymers  of  ethylene  with  controlled morphology  having high bulk density and containing a very Small quantity of  25 fines.  This  feature  allows  the  use  of his  catalyst  in  a  process t where  the  catalyst  can  be  fed  directly  into the  polymerization reactor. Particular forms to feed  the  catalyst are  in dry bulk powder,  in paste, in oil Suspension or  in solvent  Suspension. As an alternative the catalyst can be prepolymerized with  30 ethylene or propylene and optionally with a comonomer before  being  fed  into  the  reactor.

10

have an improved structure  due to  the  very  good comonomer  insertion  and,  in most  cases,  they  have  also a  narrow  molecular weight distribution  (MFR-27). Hence the low xylene soluble contents are obtained, allowing the production of  films with superior optical properties  and  very  low  blocking.  The  LMDPE roducts p are  particularly useful  for  rotomolding  applications; Elastomeric copolymers of  ethylene and propylene and elastomeric  terpolymers  of  ethylene  and  propylene  with minor  amounts of  a diene, having a content of  units derived  from  ethylene  comprised  between  about  30  and 70%  by  weight.

## EXAMPLES

The  present  invention  is now  explained  in more  details by means  of  the  following  Examples,  which  should  not  be  under stood  as  limiting  the  scope  of  the  invention.

The  properties  here  indicated  are  determined  according  to the  following  methods:

Surface area and pore Volume: determined by nitrogen adsorption according to  the B.E.T methodology using a 'Micromeritics  ASAP  2010 apparatus.

Size of  the catalyst particles: determined according to a method  based  on  the  principle  of  optical  diffraction  of  ono m chromatic  laser  light, using  the  'Malvern  Instr. 2600  appa ratuS.

40

Another  important feature of  the present invention is its tolerance to the high electrostatic charges occurring in gas phase  reactors.  This  feature  helps  to  prevent  the  formation  of  35 polymer sheets or agglomerates on the reactor walls. The good  catalytic yield  and  the low  decay  kinetics  observed  for the  present invention,  allows  its use  in most  polymerization processes, including processes operating in more  than one reactor  in series.

A  further  feature  characteristic  of he  catalyst  of he  present t t invention is when  using  a  microspheroidal silica as Support the  catalyst  obtained  has  also  a  spheroidal  morphology  and  in consequence  a  polymer  product  with  good  morphology  and flowability is obtained.

45  silica as  additive. t a

The  catalyst  component  of he  present  invention  is advan t tageously used in the polymerization of  ethylene and mix tures thereof  with  alpha-olefins  CH2=CHR,  wherein R  is an alkyl or cicloalkyl or aryl radical with 1-12 carbon atoms particular, it is used  in  the  preparation  of:

MIE  melt  index:  ASTM  D-1238,  condition E MIF  melt  index:  ASTM  D-1238,  condition F MFR  melt  flow ratio: MIFAMIE Flowability:  it is the  time  required  by  100  g  of  olymer  to p flow  through  a  stainless  steel  funnel  (outlet  opening  diameter of  12.7  mm nd  side  walls  at 20° to the vertical). a Bulk  density:  ASTM  D-1895 Morphology: optical microscopy. Fraction  soluble  in Xylene: determined  at  25°C. Comonomer contents: percentage by weight, as deter mined  via  I.R. spectra. Polymer  density:  ASTM  D-1928-C  and  ASTM  D-1505. HaZe:  ASTM-D  1003 GloSS:  ASTM-D  2457 Blocking:  ASTM-D  3354 The  haze, gloss and  blocking measurements  are made  in films of  80  Lum  of hickness  with 1500  ppm  of n  amorphous

Particle  size  distribution  of the  particulate  polymer: ASTM-D  1921

because it has a high activity and low decay kinetics. In  50  tion, an  activated  microspheroidal silica carrier  is used,  hav High density  polyethylenes  (HDPE, having a density greater than 0.940 g/cm), particularly with narrow molecular weight distribution  (MFR-27), including homopolymers  of  ethylene  and  copolymers  of  ethylene  55 with one or more alpha-olefins having from 3 to  14 carbon atoms. These  products are particularly Suitable for  thermoforming  and  injection applications; In  the  following  experimental  examples,  which  are intended  to  provide  a  better  illustration  of he  present  inven t ing  an  average  particle  size  of  0  um,  a  SiO2  contents  Superior 4 to 99%  by weight, a surface area of  290  m/g  and a pore volume  of  1.62 ml/g.  The  triethylaluminum  (TEAL)  and  the diethylaluminum chloride (DEAC)  are  available from  Akzo Nobel Co. The titanium tetra-n-butylate is available from Merck.  The  magnesium  chloride  is supplied  by  from  Maru yasu  Co.  The  hexane  available  from Phillips Petroleum  was purified  with  molecular  sieves  and  nitrogen  to  remove  oxygen and  water.  All  Solid  component  preparations  were  carried  out in  an  inert  atmosphere.

## Preparation  of  the  Solid  Catalyst  Component

## Example  1

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted  with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously purged  with nitrogen were  fed  44  g  (0.462 moles) of

Linear medium  density and  linear low density polyethyl enes  (LMDPE  and  LLDPE,  having  a  density  lower  than  60 0.940  g/cm)  most  specifically very low and  ultra low density  linear  polyethylenes  (VLDPE nd  ULDPE,  hav a ing  a  density  lower  than  0.920  /cm and  as  low  as  0.880 g g/m)  consisting of  copolymers  of  ethylene  with  one  or more  alpha-olefins having from 3 to 14 carbon atoms,  65 having  a  content  of nits derived  from  ethylene  greater u than approximately 80% by weight. These products

11

anhydrous MgCl, and 330 ml (0.969 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was llowed  to  stir  at  300  rpm nd eated  to  150° a a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to  have  the solids  completely dissolved, thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40°C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40° C.  and  under  the  same stirring,  250g f  the  silica  support  were  added.  This  silica  was o previously dehydrated  and  treated  with 19 ml  (0.139 moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min  10 utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature for 1 hour. Into this mixture, kept  at 60° C.  and undergently  stirring,  a  solution  consisting  of  100  ml  of  nhy a drous hexane and 192 ml of PMHS (0.085  moles) was  15 dropped  into it over  a  period  of  time  of  1.5  hours.  At  the  end of  the  addition, stirring was  continued  for  2  hours  at a  tem perature of  60° C. To  this mixture a solution of  200  ml  of anhydrous hexane and 184 ml of  SiC1  (1.606 moles)  was dropped over  a period  of  time of  1 hour. At  the end  of  the addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have the solid settled. The  supernatant liquid was removed, the  25 Solid  was  repeatedly  washed  with  anhydrous  hexane  and  then dried at 60° C. under  nitrogen flow thus giving 390  g  of  a reddish  powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

30

Total  Titanium-7.0%  (by  weight)

Mg 2.0%  (by  weight)

SiO=75.9%  (by  weight)

Al=0.5%  (by weight)

Cl=10.9%  (by  weight)

OBu=4.1%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=200  m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.45 cm/g

## Example  2

40

55

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously  purged  with  nitrogen  were  fed  5.28  g  (0.055  moles)  of anhydrous MgCl2 and  39.6 ml (0.116 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was llowed  to  stir  at  300  rpm nd eated  to  150° a a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to  have  the solids  completely dissolved, thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40°C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40° C.  and  under  the  same  50 stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were  added.  This  silica  was o previously dehydrated  and  treated  with  23 ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature for 1 hour. Into this mixture, kept  at 60° C.  and undergently  stirring,  a  solution  consisting  of  100  ml  of  nhy a drous  hexane  and  23  ml  of  MHS 0.010  moles)  was  dropped P ( into it over  a  period  of  time  of  1.5 hours. At  the end  of  the addition, stirring  was  continued  for  2  hours  at  a  temperature  60 of  60°C. To  this mixture  a  solution  of  100  ml  of nhydrous a hexane  and  22  ml  of  SiCl,  (0.192  moles)  was  dropped  over  a period of  1  hour. At the end of  the addition, stirring was continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature  of  60°C.  The  tem perature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C.  and  kept  65 for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture to room temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have he  Solid  settled. t 45

35

12

The  Supernatant  liquid  was  removed,  the  Solid  was  repeatedly washed with anhydrous hexane and finally dried at 60° C. under nitrogen flow thus giving 360 g of  a light reddish powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Total  Titanium=1.4%  (by  weight)

Mg 0.5%  (by  weight)

SiO-81.0%  (by  weight)

Al=1.4%  (by weight)

Cl=8.4%  (by  weight)

OBu=6.3%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=150  m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.35  cm/g

## Example  3

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted  with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously  purged  with  nitrogen  were  fed  5.28  g  (0.055  moles)  of anhydrous MgCl2 and  39.6 ml (0.116 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was  allowed  to  stir  at  300  pm nd eated  to  150° r a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to have  the  solids  completely dissolved,  thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40° C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of  nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40°C.  and  under  the  same stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were dded.  This  silica  was o a previously dehydrated  and  treated  with 23 ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature for 1 hour. Into this mixture, kept  at 60° C.  and undergently  stirring,  a  solution  consisting  of  100  ml  of  nhy a drous  hexane  and  23  ml  of  MHS 0.010  moles)  was  dropped P ( into it over  a  period  of  time  of  1.5 hours. At  the end  of  the addition, stirring  was  continued  for  2  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  To  this mixture  a  solution  of  100  ml  of nhydrous a hexane  and  22  ml  of iCl,  (0.192  moles)  was  dropped  over  a S period  of  time  of  1 hour.  At  the  end  of he  addition, stirring t was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at a temperature  of  60° C.  The temperature of  the mixture  was then brought to 65° C. and kept  for  additional  2  hours.  After  cooling  the  mixture  to  room temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have he  Solid  settled. t The  Supernatant  liquid  was  removed,  the  Solid  was  repeatedly washed  with  anhydrous  hexane.  The  solid  thus  obtained  was again Suspended in 2200  ml  of  anhydrous  hexane  and  then 31.4  g f  DEAC 0.260  moles)  in  200  ml  of  anhydrous  hexane o ( were  added  to  the resulting  Suspension  under  gently  stirring. Contact was maintained for 50 min at room temperature. Finally,  the  Supernatant  liquid  was  removed  and  the  Solid  was dried at 60° C. under  nitrogen flow thus giving 300  g  of  a brown-reddish  powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Total  Titanium=1.2%  (by  weight)

Mg 0.3%  (by  weight)

SiO-81.0%  (by  weight)

Al=1.8%  (by  weight)

Cl=7.0%  (by  weight)

OBu=7.7%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=155 m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.36  cm/g

## Example  4

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted  with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously  purged  with  nitrogen  were  fed  5.28  g  (0.055  moles)  of

13

15

anhydrous MgCl2 and  39.6 ml (0.116 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was llowed  to  stir  at  300  rpm nd eated  to  150° a a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to  have  the solids  completely dissolved, thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40°C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40° C.  and  under  the  same stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were  added.  This  silica  was o previously dehydrated  and  treated  with  23 ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min  10 utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature  for  1 hour.  To  this  mixture  a  solution  of 00  ml  of 1 anhydrous hexane and 22 ml of  SiC1  (0.192 moles) was dropped over  a period  of  time of  1 hour. At  the end  of  the addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have the solid settled. The  supernatant liquid was removed, the Solid  was  repeatedly  washed  with  anhydrous  hexane  and  then dried  at  60°C.  under  nitrogen  flow,  thus  giving  390g f  a  light o reddish  powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

25

Total  Titanium=1.5%  (by  weight)

Mg-0.3%  (by  weight)

SiO=81.2%  (by  weight)

Al=1.2%  (by weight)

Cl=7.2%  (by  weight)

OBu=7.6%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=153 m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.36  cm/g

## Example  5

35

40

50

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously  purged  with  nitrogen  were  fed  52.8  g  (0.554  moles)  of anhydrous MgCl, and 396 ml (1.163 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was llowed  to  stir  at  300  rpm nd eated  to  150° a a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to  have  the solids  completely dissolved, thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40°C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40° C.  and  under  the  same  45 stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were  added.  This  silica  was o previously dehydrated  and  treated  with  23 ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature  for  1 hour.  To  this  mixture  a  solution  of  00  ml  of 2 anhydrous hexane and 221 ml of  SiCl  (1.929 moles) was dropped over  a period  of  time of  1 hour. At  the end  of  the addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to  55 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have the solid settled. The  supernatant liquid was removed, the Solid  was  repeatedly  washed  with  anhydrous  hexane  and  then dried  at  60°C.  under  nitrogen  flow  thus  giving  300   f  a  light  60 go reddish  powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Total  Titanium=1.7%  (by  weight)

MgF2.4%  (by  weight)

SiO=76.7%  (by  weight)

Al=0.8%  (by weight)

30

65

14

Cl=10.0%  (by  weight)

OBu=7.5%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=185 m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.55  cm/g

## Example  6

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted  with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously  purged  with  nitrogen  were  fed  52.8  g  (0.554  moles)  of anhydrous MgCl, and 396 ml (1.163 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was  allowed  to  stir  at  300  pm nd eated  to  150° r a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to have  the  solids  completely dissolved,  thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40° C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of  nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40°C.  and  under  the  same stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were dded.  This  silica  was o a previously dehydrated  and  treated  with 23 ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature  for  1 hour.  To  this  mixture  a  solution  of  00  ml  of 2 anhydrous hexane  and 221 ml of  SiCl  (1.929 moles) was dropped over  a period  of  time of  1  hour. At  the end  of  the addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a emperature t of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have the solid settled. The  supernatant liquid was removed, the solid was repeatedly washed with anhydrous hexane. The solid  thus  obtained  was  again  suspended  in 2200  ml  of  nhy a drous  hexane  and  then  30   f  DEAC 0.249  moles)  in  200  ml go ( of  anhydrous  hexane  were  added  to  the  resulting  Suspension under  gently stirring. Contact  was  maintained  for  50  min  at room  temperature.  Finally,  the  Supernatant  liquid  was removed  and  the  solid  was  dried  at  60°C.  under  nitrogen  flow thus  giving  400  g  of  a  brown-reddish  powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.53 cm/g

Total  Titanium=1.8%  (by  weight)

Mg 2.7%  (by weight)

SiO=75.5%  (by  weight)

Al=1.4%  (by weight)

Cl=12.0%  (by  weight)

OBu=5.6%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=180  m/g

## Example  7

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted  with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously purged with nitrogen were  fed 24 g  (0.252 moles)  of anhydrous MgCl, and 180 ml (0.528 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was  allowed  to  stir  at  300  pm nd eated  to  150° r a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to have  the  solids  completely dissolved,  thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40° C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of  nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40°C.  and  under  the  same stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were dded.  This  silica  was o a previously dehydrated  and  treated  with 23 ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature  for  1 hour.  To  this  mixture  a  solution  of 00  ml  of 1 anhydrous hexane  and 100 ml of  SiCl, (0.873 moles) was dropped over  a period  of  time of  1  hour. At  the end  of  the

Mg-1.5%  (by  weight)

15

addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have the solid settled. The  supernatant liquid was removed, the Solid  was  repeatedly  washed  with  anhydrous  hexane  and  then dried at 60° C. under  nitrogen flow thus giving 360  g  of  a reddish  powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Total  Titanium=2.1%  (by  weight)

Mg-1.4%  (by  weight)

SiO-78.3%  (by  weight)

Al=0.9%  (by weight)

Cl=8.7%  (by  weight)

OBu=7.6%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=193  m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.62 cm/g

10

15

## Example  8

20

25

35

16

Al=1.7%  (by  weight)

Cl=10.3%  (by  weight)

OBu=6.7%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=202  m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.48  cm/g.

The  produced  catalyst  demonstrates  the  following  proper ties when  analyzed with X-ray  photoelectron spectroscopy, UV-VIS  spectroscopy  and  XANES  spectroscopy.

X-Ray  Photoelectron Spectroscopy  (XPS)

Triethylaluminum (TEAL)  was  used during polymeriza tion,  therefore,  the  FWHM as  analyzed  with  or  without  the w reaction  with  TEAL.

| CATALYST   | TEAL REACTION   | BINDING ENERGY (TI 2p 3/2)   | FWHM (eV)   |
|------------|-----------------|------------------------------|-------------|
| Example 8  | NO YES          | 458.65 Il-8.                 | 3.0 3.0     |

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously purged with nitrogen were fed 24  g  (0.252 moles)  of anhydrous MgCl, and 180 ml (0.528 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was llowed  to  stir  at  300  rpm nd eated  to  150° a a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to  have  the solids  completely dissolved, thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40°C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40° C.  and  under  the  same  30 stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were  added.  This  silica  was o previously dehydrated  and  treated with  23  ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature  for  1 hour.  To  this  mixture  a  solution  of 00  ml  of 1 anhydrous hexane and 100 ml of  SiC1  (0.873 moles)  was dropped over  a period  of  time of  1 hour. At  the end  of  the addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the na.-not  analyzed,

From  the  XPS  spectra, the  intensity of he  signals  and  the t intensity ratio  of he  signals  of  elements  such  as  C.  Si,  Ti  and t Mg  were  observed  and  analyzed  as  shown  below:

| INTENSITY OF THE SIGNALS   | INTENSITY OF THE SIGNALS   | INTENSITY OF THE SIGNALS   | INTENSITY OF THE SIGNALS   | INTENSITYRATIO OFTHESIGNALS   | INTENSITYRATIO OFTHESIGNALS   | INTENSITYRATIO OFTHESIGNALS   |
|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| C 1s                       | Si2p                       | Ti2p 3/2                   | Mg KLL                     | Mg/Si                         | Ti/Si                         | MgTi                          |
| 43OO                       | STS4                       | 2350                       | 1343                       | O.23                          | O.41                          | O.S7                          |

## UV-VIS  Spectroscopy

The  catalyst  of  Example  8  was  analyzed  by  UV-VIS  spec troscopy. FIG.3  provides  identification  of  titanium  species  in the  surface  of he  catalytic  support.  See  wave  number  values, t titanium chemical  species  and  their  concentration in the  fol lowing  Table:

|                   | Example 8          | Example 8          | Example 8                        | Example 8                      | Example 8                       |
|-------------------|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Wave number (nm)  | 257.9              | 287.6              | 311.8                            | 331.7                          | 343.4                           |
| Chemical species  | Pentacoordinated T | Pentacoordinated T | Oligomerical octahedric Ti (IV)) | Oligomerical octahedric T (IV) | Oligomerical octahedric Ti (IV) |
| Concentration (%) | 34.9               | 21.6               | 25.9                             | 13.4                           | 4.2                             |

mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have the solid settled. The  supernatant liquid was removed, the solid was repeatedly washed with anhydrous hexane. The  55  Example  8.  XANES  spectra  at  the  Ti  Kedge  are  presented  in solid  thus  obtained  was  again  suspended  in 2200  ml  of  nhy a drous  hexane  and  then  30   f  DEAC 0.249  moles)  in  200  ml go ( of  anhydrous  hexane  were  added  to  the  resulting  Suspension under  gently stirring. Contact  was  maintained  for 50  min  at room  temperature.  Finally,  the  Supernatant  liquid  was  60  close  inspection  of  the  pre-edge  features for Example  8. removed  and  the  solid  was  dried  at  60°C.  under  nitrogen  flow thus  giving  350  g  of  a  brown-reddish  powder. XANES  Spectroscopy XANES  spectroscopy  analysis  was  done  for  the  catalyst  of FIG.  4.  The  spectra  is shifted  in  they  axis  for  a  better  inspec tion  of he  XANES eatures.  A epresentation  of  the  pre-edge t f r structures  is presented  in FIG.  5.  The  inset  corresponds  to  the superposition of  the pre-edge structures.  FIG. 6 provides Example  9

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Total  Titanium=2.0%  (by  weight)

SiO=76.8%  (by  weight)

65

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted  with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ ously  purged  with  nitrogen  were  fed  52.8  g  (0.554  moles)  of anhydrous MgCl, and 396 ml (1.163 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was  allowed  to  stir  at  300  pm nd eated  to  150° r a h

17

15

30

C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to  have  the solids  completely dissolved, thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40°C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40° C.  and  under  the  same stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were  added.  This  silica  was o previously dehydrated  and  treated  with  23 ml  (0.167  moles) of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature  for  1 hour.  To  this  mixture  a  solution  of  00  ml  of 2 anhydrous hexane and 221 ml of  SiC1  (1.929 moles)  was dropped over  a period  of  time of  1 hour. At  the end  of  the addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have the  solid  settled.  The upernatant  liquid  was  removed,  and  the s solid was repeatedly washed with anhydrous hexane. The solid  thus  obtained  was  again  suspended  in 2200  ml  of  nhy a drous  hexane  and  then  30   f  DEAC 0.249  moles)  in  200  ml go ( of  anhydrous  hexane  were  added  to  the  resulting  Suspension under  gently stirring. Contact  was  maintained  for 50  min  at room  temperature.  The  Supernatant  liquid was  removed  and the  solid  was  once  again  Suspended  in  2200  ml  of nhydrous  25 a hexane  and  then  30  g  of  Tn-HAL  (0.106  moles)  in 200  ml  of anhydrous hexane were added to the resulting Suspension under  gently stirring. Contact  was  maintained  for 50  min  at room  temperature.  Finally,  the  Supernatant  liquid  was removed  and  the  solid  was  dried  at  60°C.  under  nitrogen  flow thus  giving  340  g  of  a  brown-reddish  powder. 5 10

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics  of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Total  Titanium=1.9%  (by  weight)

MgF2.9%  (by  weight)

SiO=74.1%  (by  weight)

Al=1.5%  (by weight)

Cl=12.6%  (by  weight)

OBu=6.0%  (by  weight)

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.20  cm/g

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=167  m/g

## Example  10

In  a  5  liter flask  fitted with  a  mechanical  stirrer  and  previ  45 ously purged with nitrogen were fed 24  g  (0.252 moles)  of anhydrous MgCl, and 180 ml (0.528 moles) of  Ti(OBu). This  mixture  was llowed  to  stir  at  300  rpm nd eated  to  150° a a h C. for  about  12  hours  in order  to  have  the solids  completely dissolved, thereby  a  clear  liquid  product  was  obtained. This  50 resulting liquid  was  cooled  down  to 40°C.  and  under  gently stirring  at 150  rpm,  it was  diluted  with  3200  ml  of nhydrous a hexane. Into this solution  kept  at  40° C.  and  under  the  same stirring,  300g f  the  silica  support  were  added.  This  silica  was o of  triethylaluminum  diluted  in  anhydrous  hexane,  for  50  min utes  and  at  room  temperature.  Once  the  addition  of  the  silica is  completed,  the  mixture  was  heated  to  60°  C.  and  kept  at  this temperature  for  1 hour.  To  this  mixture  a  solution  of 00  ml  of 1 dropped over  a period  of  time of  1 hour. At  the end  of  the addition,  stirring  was  continued  for  3.5  hours  at  a  temperature of  60°C.  The  temperature  of  the  mixture  was  then  brought  to 65° C. and kept for additional 2 hours. After cooling the mixture  to  room  temperature,  the  stirring  was  stopped  to  have  65 the  solid  settled.  The upernatant  liquid  was  removed,  and  the s solid was repeatedly washed with anhydrous hexane. The

35

40

18

solid  thus  obtained  was  again  suspended  in 2200  ml  of  nhy a drous  hexane  and  then  60  g f  EAC 0.498  moles)  in  200  ml o D ( of  anhydrous  hexane  were  added  to  the  resulting  Suspension under  gently stirring. Contact  was  maintained  for  50  min  at room  temperature.  Finally,  the  Supernatant  liquid  was removed  and  the  solid  was  dried  at  60°C.  under  nitrogen  flow thus  giving  300  g  of  a  brown-reddish  powder.

The  chemical  and  physical characteristics of  the  resulting reddish  powder  were  as  follows:

Total  Titanium=2.0%  (by  weight)

Mg1.3%  (by weight)

SiO=76.3%  (by  weight)

Al=2.3%  (by weight)

Cl=10.8%  (by  weight)

OBu=6.3%  (by  weight)

Surface  Area  (B.E.T.)=200  m/g

Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)=0.45  cm/g

## Laboratory  Polymerization  Tests

## Example  11

## Polymerization  of  Ethylene  (HDPE)

A  4-liter stainless steel autoclave, purged  under  nitrogen flow for  1 hour  at 75° C.  and  then cooled  to 30° C., was  fed with  0.06  g  of he  solid  catalyst  component  from  the  example t 8,0.79g  of  TEAL ixed  with  75  ml  of  anhydrous  hexane,  and m 280  g  of  anhydrous  propane.  The  temperature  was  raised  to 60° C., and  then 520  g  of  anhydrous  propane  were  fed. The temperature was raised again to 80° C. and then 2  bars of hydrogen were fed simultaneously with 7  bars of  ethylene. After that, the temperature was  settled to 85°C. The  poly merization was  conducted in slurry liquid phase. The  poly merization  time  was  2  hours,  during  which  time  the  ethylene pressure  was  kept  constant.  After  this  period  the  reaction  was stopped  by  venting  off  ethylene,  hydrogen  and  propane  and 55  g  of  olymer ere  obtained,  which  exhibited  the  following p w properties:

MIE

2.4 g/10  min

MIFAMIE

26

Polymer  Density

0.96 g/cm

Bulk  Density

0.46 g/cm

## Example  12

## Copolymerization  of  Ethylene  with Butene-1 (LLDPE)

previously dehydrated  and  treated  with  23 ml  (0.167  moles)  55  with  0.06  g  of he  solid  catalyst  component  from  the  example anhydrous hexane and 100 ml of  SiCl, (0.873 moles) was  60  butene-1 were fed simultaneously with 2 bars of  hydrogen A  4  liter stainless steel autoclave, purged  under  nitrogen flow for  1 hour  at 75° C.  and  then cooled  to 30° C., was  fed t 8,0.78g  of  TEAL ixed  with  75  ml  of  anhydrous  hexane,  and m 280  g  of  anhydrous  propane.  The  temperature  was  raised  to 60° C., and  then 520  g  of  anhydrous  propane  were  fed. The temperature was  raised again to 70° C., and  then 290  ml  of and  5  bars  of thylene.  After  that,  the  temperature  is  settled  to e 75° C. The  polymerization was conducted in slurry liquid phase. The  polymerization  time  was  3  hours, during which time  the  ethylene  pressure  was  kept  constant.  After  this  period the reaction was  stopped  by venting off  ethylene, butene-1, hydrogen  and  propane  and  240  g  of  polymer  were  obtained, which  exhibited  the  following  properties:

19

| MIE                        | 0.91 g/10 min   |
|----------------------------|-----------------|
| MIFAMIE                    | 26              |
| Fraction Soluble in Xylene | 9.2%            |
| Comonomer content          | 8.7%            |
| Polymer Density            | 0.917 g/cm      |
| Bulk Density               | 0.36 g/cm       |

Pilot Plant  Tests

A  pilot plant continuously operated was used to prepare LLDPE  as shown  in FIG.  2.

20

The produced polymer is discharged from the reaction Zone  through  a  discharge  system  11  that  provides  the  recovery of  the reactive  and  non-reactive gases, recycling said gases back  to  the  recycle  stream  5  at  spot  12  nd  lowers  the  pressure a of  the discharged mixture of  polymer  and  gases at certain pressure for later conveying  the  produced  polymer  particles 13  for  downward  sampling.

## Examples 13 to 23

10

A  fluidized  bed  gas  phase  reactor  1 with  45  cm  of nternal i diameter and 120 cm  of  reaction Zone height is  fed by a dry-solid catalyst feeder 2. The  bed  of  polymer  particles in reaction  Zone3  is kept  in  fluidized  state  by  a  recycle  stream  4 that  works  as  a  fluidizing  medium s  well  as  a  dissipating  heat a agent for absorbing the exothermal heat generated within reaction  Zone  3. The  Superficial velocity  of he  gas,  resulting t from  the  flow rate  of  recycle  stream  4  within reactor  1 is 0.7 15 m/s.  Stream5,  which  contains  the  gas  discharged  from  reactor  20  good  optical  properties  and  a  low  blocking  strength. 1,  said  gas  having  low  monomer ontents,  is  fed  to  the  Suction c of  compressor 6. The  combined  reaction and compression heats  are  then removed  from  recycle  stream  5  in an  external heat exchange  system 7  in order  to control the reactor  tem In  all  examples the  pilot  reactor  run  was performed Smoothly, with  good  catalytic yield  and  no  agglomerates or sheets  were  formed.  The  polymers  obtained  had  a  good  mor phology  and,  in most  cases,  less  than 1%  of  fines (&lt;250  um). The films obtained with these polymers presented very During  the  performance  of  the EXAMPLE  20  it was  per formed  a  decay  test and  the measured  half-life  time  was  3.8 hours. The  results are  shown  in table 1.

The  examples 13 to 23 were  conducted in the gas phase pilot  reactor  at  88°C.,  using  in  each  EXAMPLE espectively r the  catalysts  produced  in the EXAMPLES  1 to 10. The  cata lyst  produced  in the  EXAMPLE  10  was  also  used  in the  pilot polymerization  at 75°  C.  as  shown  in  the EXAMPLE  23.

TABLE  1

| EXAMPLE                           | 13    | 14    | 15    | 16    | 17    | 18    | 19    | 2O    | 21    | 22     | 23     |
|-----------------------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|--------|--------|
| Catalyst used                     | Ex. 1 | Ex. 2 | Ex. 3 | Ex. 4 | Ex. S | Ex. 6 | Ex. 7 | Ex. 8 | Ex. 9 | Ex. 10 | Ex. 10 |
| Ti(%)                             | 7.0   | 1.4   | 1.2   | 1.5   | 1.7   | 1.8   | 2.1   | 2.0   | 1.9   | 2.0    | 2.0    |
| Mg (%)                            | 2.0   | O.S   | O.3   | O.3   | 2.4   | 2.7   | 1.3   | 1.5   | 2.9   | 1.5    | 1.5    |
| Temperature (C.)                  | 88    | 88    | 88    | 88    | 88    | 88    | 88    | 88    | 88    | 88     | 75     |
| Ethylene partial pressure (bar)   | 3     | 11.8  | 9     | 10.9  | 5     | 7     | 7     | 7     | 7     | 7      | 7      |
| Total pressure (bar)              | 21    | 22    | 21    | 21    | 21    | 21    | 21    | 21    | 21    | 21     | 21     |
| Residence Time (h)                | 4.43  | 3.71  | 5.32  | 3.2O  | 4.86  | 3.92  | 3.18  | 2.89  | 3.91  | 3.70   | 3.15   |
| Hafethylene (mole/mole)           | O.10  | O.098 | O.O86 | O.096 | O.096 | O.118 | O.098 | O.12  | O.13  | O.12   | O.17   |
| Butenefethylene (mole/mole)       | O.39  | O41   | O46   | 0.44  | O.35  | O4O   | O.39  | O41   | 0.37  | O41    | O45    |
| Catalytic yield (kg/g)            | 3.0   | 1.6   | 1.7   | 1.6   | 4.3   | 7.5   | S.O   | 7.5   | 7.1   | 7.1    | 6.2    |
| Bulk Density (g/cm)               | O.28  | O.34  | O.38  | O.34  | O.29  | O.31  | O.38  | O.38  | O.38  | O.38   | O3S    |
| MIE (g/10 min)                    | O.68  | O.66  | 0.72  | O.74  | O.64  | O.68  | O.69  | O.67  | O.69  | O.65   | 0.57   |
| MIF (g/10 min)                    | 20.4  | 17.3  | 2O6   | 19.9  | 23.3  | 18.6  | 19.1  | 17.6  | 18.2  | 16.9   | 15.2   |
| MFR - FE                          | 30    | 26    | 28    | 27    | 36    | 27    | 28    | 26    | 26    | 26     | 26     |
| Comonomer Content (%)             | 8.8   | 7.8   | 8.7   | 7.7   | 9.4   | 8.3   | 8.4   | 7.9   | 8.2   | 8.1    | 8.8    |
| Fraction Soluble in Xylene (%)    | 12.3  | 8.9   | 9.4   | 7.1   | 13.7  | 9.4   | 9.5   | 7.8   | 10.1  | 8.O    | 9.3    |
| Polymer Density (g/cm)            | O.918 | O.918 | O.918 | O.919 | O.917 | O.918 | O.918 | O.918 | O.918 | O.918  | O.917  |
| Flowability (s/100g)              |       | 14.4  | 11.1  | 13.3  | 14.4  | 17.9  | 12.4  | 11.9  | 10.8  | 12.7   | 12.6   |
| Particle size distribution (wt %) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |        |        |
| <250 m                            | 2     | 2     | 1     | 1     | 2     | 3     | <O.S  | 1     | 1     | 1      | 1      |
| 250-420 m                         | 7     | 7     | 7     | 2     | 7     | 5     | 2     | 2     | 2     | 2      | 2      |
| 420-840 m                         | 37    | 49    | 60    | 35    | 45    | 28    | 36    | 35    | 28    | 39     | 37     |
| >840 m                            | S4    | 42    | 32    | 62    | 46    | 64    | 62    | 62    | 69    | 58     | 60     |
| Haze (%)                          | 11.3  |       |       |       |       |       | 11.6  | 11.3  | 11.3  | 11.4   |        |
| Gloss (%)                         | 73.0  |       |       |       |       |       | 79.5  | 80.7  | 79.3  | 80.2   |        |
| Blocking (g/100 cm)               |       | 22    | 21    | 15    |       | 24    | 24    | 16    | 30    | 19     | 24     |

perature.  The omposition  of  stream  5 s kept  constant  to  yield c i a  polymer  with  the  required  specifications.

The  invention  claimed  is:

Make-up  components  are  fed  to  the  system  at  spot  8  so  as to make  up  the  composition  of  recycle  stream  5.  So,  make-up stream 8 will include the triethyl aluminum (TEAL) that directly reacts in a ratio of  2 moles of  TEAL  per mole  of catalyst. Also at the spot 8, propane is fed as the selected non-reactive compound  required to maintain the total pres Sure  of  the  system.

The  polymerization  catalyst  is introduced  as  a  dry  powder by  a  catalyst  feeder  into reactor  1 in  a  site  within  the  reaction Zone  3,  close  to  the  distributing  plate  9  in  a  rate  to  control  the residence  time  of  the catalyst. The  reactive  gases, including ethylene  and  comonomers  are  introduced  at the  spot  10.

60  and  chlorine, wherein, based  on  the weight  of  the catalyst, 1. A  catalyst composition free of  polar solvents and  used 55  for  the  homopolymerization  of  ethylene  or  used  for  the  copo lymerization of ethylene with one or more alpha-olefins which consists essentially of  an activated particulate silica carrier, impregnated  with an organometallic compound  and catalytic active components  including magnesium,  titanium titanium is present  in an  amount  of  2.0%  by  weight, magne sium is present in an  amount  of  1.5%  by  weight,  chlorine  is present in an amount of 10.3% by weight, aluminum is present in an amount of 1.7% by weight, butoxy group is present in an amount of 6.7% by weight, Surface Area (B.E.T.)  is  202  /g,  and  Pore  Volume  (B.E.T.)  is  0.48  cm/g, m wherein  said  catalyst  displays  a  UV-VIS  spectra  as  shown  in

65

21

FIG.3  and  an  X-Ray  Absorption  Near  Edge  Structure  spectra as  shown  in one  or  more  of  FIGS.  4,  5  and  6.

- 2.  The atalyst  composition  of  claim  1,  wherein  the  product c of  the  homopolymerization  or  copolymerization  exhibits  less than 1%  of  fines.

5

22